English programmes
of study: key stages
1 and 2
National curriculum in England




September 2013
Contents
Spoken language – years 1 to 6                                     7

Key stage 1 – year 1                                               9

Key stage 1 – year 2                                               16

Lower key stage 2 – years 3 and 4                                  23

Upper key stage 2 – years 5 and 6                                  31

English Appendix 1: Spelling                                       39
  Spelling – work for year 1                                       40
  Spelling – work for year 2                                       45
  Spelling – work for years 3 and 4                                49
  Word list – years 3 and 4                                        54
  Spelling – years 5 and 6                                         56
  Word list – years 5 and 6                                        61
  International Phonetic Alphabet (non-statutory)                  63

English Appendix 2: Vocabulary, grammar and punctuation            64

Glossary for the programmes of study for English (non-statutory)   70
                                                                      English – key stages 1 and 2


Purpose of study
English has a pre-eminent place in education and in society. A high-quality education in
English will teach pupils to speak and write fluently so that they can communicate their
ideas and emotions to others and through their reading and listening, others can
communicate with them. Through reading in particular, pupils have a chance to develop
culturally, emotionally, intellectually, socially and spiritually. Literature, especially, plays a
key role in such development. Reading also enables pupils both to acquire knowledge and
to build on what they already know. All the skills of language are essential to participating
fully as a member of society; pupils, therefore, who do not learn to speak, read and write
fluently and confidently are effectively disenfranchised.

Aims
The overarching aim for English in the national curriculum is to promote high standards of
language and literacy by equipping pupils with a strong command of the spoken and
written word, and to develop their love of literature through widespread reading for
enjoyment. The national curriculum for English aims to ensure that all pupils:
   read easily, fluently and with good understanding
   develop the habit of reading widely and often, for both pleasure and information
   acquire a wide vocabulary, an understanding of grammar and knowledge of linguistic
    conventions for reading, writing and spoken language
   appreciate our rich and varied literary heritage
   write clearly, accurately and coherently, adapting their language and style in and for a
    range of contexts, purposes and audiences
   use discussion in order to learn; they should be able to elaborate and explain clearly
    their understanding and ideas
   are competent in the arts of speaking and listening, making formal presentations,
    demonstrating to others and participating in debate.

Spoken language
The national curriculum for English reflects the importance of spoken language in pupils’
development across the whole curriculum – cognitively, socially and linguistically. Spoken
language underpins the development of reading and writing. The quality and variety of
language that pupils hear and speak are vital for developing their vocabulary and grammar
and their understanding for reading and writing. Teachers should therefore ensure the
continual development of pupils’ confidence and competence in spoken language and
listening skills. Pupils should develop a capacity to explain their understanding of books
and other reading, and to prepare their ideas before they write. They must be assisted in
making their thinking clear to themselves as well as to others and teachers should ensure
that pupils build secure foundations by using discussion to probe and remedy their



                                                                                                 3
English – key stages 1 and 2


misconceptions. Pupils should also be taught to understand and use the conventions for
discussion and debate.

All pupils should be enabled to participate in and gain knowledge, skills and understanding
associated with the artistic practice of drama. Pupils should be able to adopt, create and
sustain a range of roles, responding appropriately to others in role. They should have
opportunities to improvise, devise and script drama for one another and a range of
audiences, as well as to rehearse, refine, share and respond thoughtfully to drama and
theatre performances.

Statutory requirements which underpin all aspects of spoken language across the six
years of primary education form part of the national curriculum. These are reflected and
contextualised within the reading and writing domains which follow.

Reading
The programmes of study for reading at key stages 1 and 2 consist of two dimensions:
   word reading
   comprehension (both listening and reading).

It is essential that teaching focuses on developing pupils’ competence in both dimensions;
different kinds of teaching are needed for each.

Skilled word reading involves both the speedy working out of the pronunciation of
unfamiliar printed words (decoding) and the speedy recognition of familiar printed words.
Underpinning both is the understanding that the letters on the page represent the sounds
in spoken words. This is why phonics should be emphasised in the early teaching of
reading to beginners (i.e. unskilled readers) when they start school.

Good comprehension draws from linguistic knowledge (in particular of vocabulary and
grammar) and on knowledge of the world. Comprehension skills develop through pupils’
experience of high-quality discussion with the teacher, as well as from reading and
discussing a range of stories, poems and non-fiction. All pupils must be encouraged to
read widely across both fiction and non-fiction to develop their knowledge of themselves
and the world in which they live, to establish an appreciation and love of reading, and to
gain knowledge across the curriculum. Reading widely and often increases pupils’
vocabulary because they encounter words they would rarely hear or use in everyday
speech. Reading also feeds pupils’ imagination and opens up a treasure-house of wonder
and joy for curious young minds.

It is essential that, by the end of their primary education, all pupils are able to read fluently,
and with confidence, in any subject in their forthcoming secondary education.




4
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing
The programmes of study for writing at key stages 1 and 2 are constructed similarly to
those for reading:
   transcription (spelling and handwriting)
   composition (articulating ideas and structuring them in speech and writing).

It is essential that teaching develops pupils’ competence in these two dimensions. In
addition, pupils should be taught how to plan, revise and evaluate their writing. These
aspects of writing have been incorporated into the programmes of study for composition.

Writing down ideas fluently depends on effective transcription: that is, on spelling quickly
and accurately through knowing the relationship between sounds and letters (phonics) and
understanding the morphology (word structure) and orthography (spelling structure) of
words. Effective composition involves forming, articulating and communicating ideas, and
then organising them coherently for a reader. This requires clarity, awareness of the
audience, purpose and context, and an increasingly wide knowledge of vocabulary and
grammar. Writing also depends on fluent, legible and, eventually, speedy handwriting.

Spelling, vocabulary, grammar, punctuation and glossary
The two statutory appendices – on spelling and on vocabulary, grammar and punctuation
– give an overview of the specific features that should be included in teaching the
programmes of study.

Opportunities for teachers to enhance pupils’ vocabulary arise naturally from their reading
and writing. As vocabulary increases, teachers should show pupils how to understand the
relationships between words, how to understand nuances in meaning, and how to develop
their understanding of, and ability to use, figurative language. They should also teach
pupils how to work out and clarify the meanings of unknown words and words with more
than one meaning. References to developing pupils’ vocabulary are also included within
the appendices.

Pupils should be taught to control their speaking and writing consciously and to use
Standard English. They should be taught to use the elements of spelling, grammar,
punctuation and ‘language about language’ listed. This is not intended to constrain or
restrict teachers’ creativity, but simply to provide the structure on which they can construct
exciting lessons. A non-statutory Glossary is provided for teachers.

Throughout the programmes of study, teachers should teach pupils the vocabulary they
need to discuss their reading, writing and spoken language. It is important that pupils learn
the correct grammatical terms in English and that these terms are integrated within
teaching.




                                                                                              5
English – key stages 1 and 2


School curriculum
The programmes of study for English are set out year-by-year for key stage 1 and two-
yearly for key stage 2. The single year blocks at key stage 1 reflect the rapid pace of
development in word reading during these two years. Schools are, however, only required
to teach the relevant programme of study by the end of the key stage. Within each key
stage, schools therefore have the flexibility to introduce content earlier or later than set out
in the programme of study. In addition, schools can introduce key stage content during an
earlier key stage if appropriate. All schools are also required to set out their school
curriculum for English on a year-by-year basis and make this information available online.

Attainment targets
By the end of each key stage, pupils are expected to know, apply and understand the
matters, skills and processes specified in the relevant programme of study.

Schools are not required by law to teach the example content in [square brackets]
or the content indicated as being ‘non-statutory’.




6
                                                                   English – key stages 1 and 2



Spoken language – years 1 to 6

Spoken language


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   listen and respond appropriately to adults and their peers
   ask relevant questions to extend their understanding and knowledge
   use relevant strategies to build their vocabulary
   articulate and justify answers, arguments and opinions
   give well-structured descriptions, explanations and narratives for different purposes,
    including for expressing feelings
   maintain attention and participate actively in collaborative conversations, staying on
    topic and initiating and responding to comments
   use spoken language to develop understanding through speculating, hypothesising,
    imagining and exploring ideas
   speak audibly and fluently with an increasing command of Standard English
   participate in discussions, presentations, performances, role play, improvisations and
    debates
   gain, maintain and monitor the interest of the listener(s)
   consider and evaluate different viewpoints, attending to and building on the
    contributions of others
   select and use appropriate registers for effective communication.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
These statements apply to all years. The content should be taught at a level appropriate
to the age of the pupils. Pupils should build on the oral language skills that have been
taught in preceding years.
Pupils should be taught to develop their competence in spoken language and listening to
enhance the effectiveness with which they are able to communicate across a range of
contexts and to a range of audiences. They should therefore have opportunities to work
in groups of different sizes – in pairs, small groups, large groups and as a whole class.
Pupils should understand how to take turns and when and how to participate
constructively in conversations and debates.
Attention should also be paid to increasing pupils’ vocabulary, ranging from describing

                                                                                             7
English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
their immediate world and feelings to developing a broader, deeper and richer
vocabulary to discuss abstract concepts and a wider range of topics, and to enhancing
their knowledge about language as a whole.
Pupils should receive constructive feedback on their spoken language and listening, not
only to improve their knowledge and skills but also to establish secure foundations for
effective spoken language in their studies at primary school, helping them to achieve in
secondary education and beyond.




8
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2



Key stage 1 – year 1

During year 1, teachers should build on work from the Early Years Foundation Stage,
making sure that pupils can sound and blend unfamiliar printed words quickly and
accurately using the phonic knowledge and skills that they have already learnt. Teachers
should also ensure that pupils continue to learn new grapheme-phoneme
correspondences (GPCs) and revise and consolidate those learnt earlier. The
understanding that the letter(s) on the page represent the sounds in spoken words should
underpin pupils’ reading and spelling of all words. This includes common words containing
unusual GPCs. The term ‘common exception words’ is used throughout the programmes
of study for such words.

Alongside this knowledge of GPCs, pupils need to develop the skill of blending the sounds
into words for reading and establish the habit of applying this skill whenever they
encounter new words. This will be supported by practice in reading books consistent with
their developing phonic knowledge and skill and their knowledge of common exception
words. At the same time they will need to hear, share and discuss a wide range of high-
quality books to develop a love of reading and broaden their vocabulary.

Pupils should be helped to read words without overt sounding and blending after a few
encounters. Those who are slow to develop this skill should have extra practice.

Pupils’ writing during year 1 will generally develop at a slower pace than their reading. This
is because they need to encode the sounds they hear in words (spelling skills), develop
the physical skill needed for handwriting, and learn how to organise their ideas in writing.

Pupils entering year 1 who have not yet met the early learning goals for literacy should
continue to follow their school’s curriculum for the Early Years Foundation Stage to develop
their word reading, spelling and language skills. However, these pupils should follow the
year 1 programme of study in terms of the books they listen to and discuss, so that they
develop their vocabulary and understanding of grammar, as well as their knowledge more
generally across the curriculum. If they are still struggling to decode and spell, they need
to be taught to do this urgently through a rigorous and systematic phonics programme so
that they catch up rapidly.

Teachers should ensure that their teaching develops pupils’ oral vocabulary as well as
their ability to understand and use a variety of grammatical structures, giving particular
support to pupils whose oral language skills are insufficiently developed.




                                                                                              9
English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 1 programme of study

Reading – word reading


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    apply phonic knowledge and skills as the route to decode words
    respond speedily with the correct sound to graphemes (letters or groups of letters)
     for all 40+ phonemes, including, where applicable, alternative sounds for graphemes
    read accurately by blending sounds in unfamiliar words containing GPCs that have
     been taught
    read common exception words, noting unusual correspondences between spelling
     and sound and where these occur in the word
    read words containing taught GPCs and –s, –es, –ing, –ed, –er and –est endings
    read other words of more than one syllable that contain taught GPCs
    read words with contractions [for example, I’m, I’ll, we’ll], and understand that the
     apostrophe represents the omitted letter(s)
    read aloud accurately books that are consistent with their developing phonic
     knowledge and that do not require them to use other strategies to work out words
    re-read these books to build up their fluency and confidence in word reading.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should revise and consolidate the GPCs and the common exception words taught
in Reception. As soon as they can read words comprising the year 1 GPCs accurately
and speedily, they should move on to the year 2 programme of study for word reading.
The number, order and choice of exception words taught will vary according to the
phonics programme being used. Ensuring that pupils are aware of the GPCs they
contain, however unusual these are, supports spelling later.
Young readers encounter words that they have not seen before much more frequently
than experienced readers do, and they may not know the meaning of some of these.
Practice at reading such words by sounding and blending can provide opportunities not
only for pupils to develop confidence in their decoding skills, but also for teachers to
explain the meaning and thus develop pupils’ vocabulary.




10
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should be taught how to read words with suffixes by being helped to build on the
root words that they can read already. Pupils’ reading and re-reading of books that are
closely matched to their developing phonic knowledge and knowledge of common
exception words supports their fluency, as well as increasing their confidence in their
reading skills. Fluent word reading greatly assists comprehension, especially when
pupils come to read longer books.



Reading – comprehension


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   develop pleasure in reading, motivation to read, vocabulary and understanding by:
         listening to and discussing a wide range of poems, stories and non-fiction at a
          level beyond that at which they can read independently
         being encouraged to link what they read or hear read to their own experiences
         becoming very familiar with key stories, fairy stories and traditional tales,
          retelling them and considering their particular characteristics
         recognising and joining in with predictable phrases
         learning to appreciate rhymes and poems, and to recite some by heart
         discussing word meanings, linking new meanings to those already known
   understand both the books they can already read accurately and fluently and those
    they listen to by:
         drawing on what they already know or on background information and
          vocabulary provided by the teacher
         checking that the text makes sense to them as they read and correcting
          inaccurate reading
         discussing the significance of the title and events
         making inferences on the basis of what is being said and done
         predicting what might happen on the basis of what has been read so far
   participate in discussion about what is read to them, taking turns and listening to
    what others say
   explain clearly their understanding of what is read to them.




                                                                                              11
English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should have extensive experience of listening to, sharing and discussing a wide
range of high-quality books with the teacher, other adults and each other to engender a
love of reading at the same time as they are reading independently.
Pupils’ vocabulary should be developed when they listen to books read aloud and when
they discuss what they have heard. Such vocabulary can also feed into their writing.
Knowing the meaning of more words increases pupils’ chances of understanding when
they read by themselves. The meaning of some new words should be introduced to
pupils before they start to read on their own, so that these unknown words do not hold
up their comprehension.
However, once pupils have already decoded words successfully, the meaning of those
that are new to them can be discussed with them, so contributing to developing their
early skills of inference. By listening frequently to stories, poems and non-fiction that
they cannot yet read for themselves, pupils begin to understand how written language
can be structured in order, for example, to build surprise in narratives or to present facts
in non-fiction. Listening to and discussing information books and other non-fiction
establishes the foundations for their learning in other subjects. Pupils should be shown
some of the processes for finding out information.
Through listening, pupils also start to learn how language sounds and increase their
vocabulary and awareness of grammatical structures. In due course, they will be able to
draw on such grammar in their own writing.
Rules for effective discussions should be agreed with and demonstrated for pupils. They
should help to develop and evaluate them, with the expectation that everyone takes part.
Pupils should be helped to consider the opinions of others.
Role-play can help pupils to identify with and explore characters and to try out the
language they have listened to.



Writing – transcription


Statutory requirements
Spelling (see English Appendix 1)
Pupils should be taught to:
    spell:
             words containing each of the 40+ phonemes already taught
             common exception words
             the days of the week




12
                                                                   English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
   name the letters of the alphabet:
         naming the letters of the alphabet in order
         using letter names to distinguish between alternative spellings of the same
          sound
   add prefixes and suffixes:
         using the spelling rule for adding –s or –es as the plural marker for nouns and
          the third person singular marker for verbs
         using the prefix un–
         using –ing, –ed, –er and –est where no change is needed in the spelling of root
          words [for example, helping, helped, helper, eating, quicker, quickest]
   apply simple spelling rules and guidance, as listed in English Appendix 1
   write from memory simple sentences dictated by the teacher that include words using
    the GPCs and common exception words taught so far.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Reading should be taught alongside spelling, so that pupils understand that they can
read back words they have spelt.
Pupils should be shown how to segment spoken words into individual phonemes and
then how to represent the phonemes by the appropriate grapheme(s). It is important to
recognise that phoneme-grapheme correspondences (which underpin spelling) are more
variable than grapheme-phoneme correspondences (which underpin reading). For this
reason, pupils need to do much more word-specific rehearsal for spelling than for
reading.
At this stage pupils will be spelling some words in a phonically plausible way, even if
sometimes incorrectly. Misspellings of words that pupils have been taught to spell
should be corrected; other misspelt words should be used to teach pupils about
alternative ways of representing those sounds.
Writing simple dictated sentences that include words taught so far gives pupils
opportunities to apply and practise their spelling.




                                                                                            13
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
Handwriting
Pupils should be taught to:
    sit correctly at a table, holding a pencil comfortably and correctly
    begin to form lower-case letters in the correct direction, starting and finishing in the
     right place
    form capital letters
    form digits 0-9
    understand which letters belong to which handwriting ‘families’ (i.e. letters that are
     formed in similar ways) and to practise these.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Handwriting requires frequent and discrete, direct teaching. Pupils should be able to
form letters correctly and confidently. The size of the writing implement (pencil, pen)
should not be too large for a young pupil’s hand. Whatever is being used should allow
the pupil to hold it easily and correctly so that bad habits are avoided.
Left-handed pupils should receive specific teaching to meet their needs.



Writing – composition


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    write sentences by:
          saying out loud what they are going to write about
          composing a sentence orally before writing it
          sequencing sentences to form short narratives
          re-reading what they have written to check that it makes sense
    discuss what they have written with the teacher or other pupils
    read aloud their writing clearly enough to be heard by their peers and the teacher.




14
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
At the beginning of year 1, not all pupils will have the spelling and handwriting skills they
need to write down everything that they can compose out loud.
Pupils should understand, through demonstration, the skills and processes essential to
writing: that is, thinking aloud as they collect ideas, drafting, and re-reading to check
their meaning is clear.



Writing – vocabulary, grammar and punctuation


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   develop their understanding of the concepts set out in English Appendix 2 by:
        leaving spaces between words
        joining words and joining clauses using and
        beginning to punctuate sentences using a capital letter and a full stop, question
         mark or exclamation mark
        using a capital letter for names of people, places, the days of the week, and the
         personal pronoun ‘I’
        learning the grammar for year 1 in English Appendix 2
   use the grammatical terminology in English Appendix 2 in discussing their writing.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should be taught to recognise sentence boundaries in spoken sentences and to
use the vocabulary listed in English Appendix 2 (‘Terminology for pupils’) when their
writing is discussed.
Pupils should begin to use some of the distinctive features of Standard English in their
writing. ‘Standard English’ is defined in the Glossary.




                                                                                                15
English – key stages 1 and 2



Key stage 1 – year 2

By the beginning of year 2, pupils should be able to read all common graphemes. They
should be able to read unfamiliar words containing these graphemes, accurately and
without undue hesitation, by sounding them out in books that are matched closely to each
pupil’s level of word reading knowledge. They should also be able to read many common
words containing GPCs taught so far [for example, shout, hand, stop, or dream], without
needing to blend the sounds out loud first. Pupils’ reading of common exception words [for
example, you, could, many, or people], should be secure. Pupils will increase their fluency
by being able to read these words easily and automatically. Finally, pupils should be able
to retell some familiar stories that have been read to and discussed with them or that they
have acted out during year 1.

During year 2, teachers should continue to focus on establishing pupils’ accurate and
speedy word reading skills. They should also make sure that pupils listen to and discuss a
wide range of stories, poems, plays and information books; this should include whole
books. The sooner that pupils can read well and do so frequently, the sooner they will be
able to increase their vocabulary, comprehension and their knowledge across the wider
curriculum.

In writing, pupils at the beginning of year 2 should be able to compose individual
sentences orally and then write them down. They should be able to spell correctly many of
the words covered in year 1 (see English Appendix 1). They should also be able to make
phonically plausible attempts to spell words they have not yet learnt. Finally, they should
be able to form individual letters correctly, so establishing good handwriting habits from the
beginning.

It is important to recognise that pupils begin to meet extra challenges in terms of spelling
during year 2. Increasingly, they should learn that there is not always an obvious
connection between the way a word is said and the way it is spelt. Variations include
different ways of spelling the same sound, the use of so-called silent letters and groups of
letters in some words and, sometimes, spelling that has become separated from the way
that words are now pronounced, such as the ‘le’ ending in table. Pupils’ motor skills also
need to be sufficiently advanced for them to write down ideas that they may be able to
compose orally. In addition, writing is intrinsically harder than reading: pupils are likely to
be able to read and understand more complex writing (in terms of its vocabulary and
structure) than they are capable of producing themselves.

For pupils who do not have the phonic knowledge and skills they need for year 2, teachers
should use the year 1 programmes of study for word reading and spelling so that pupils’
word reading skills catch up. However, teachers should use the year 2 programme of
study for comprehension so that these pupils hear and talk about new books, poems, other
writing, and vocabulary with the rest of the class.


16
                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 2 programme of study

Reading – word reading


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   continue to apply phonic knowledge and skills as the route to decode words until
    automatic decoding has become embedded and reading is fluent
   read accurately by blending the sounds in words that contain the graphemes taught
    so far, especially recognising alternative sounds for graphemes
   read accurately words of two or more syllables that contain the same graphemes as
    above
   read words containing common suffixes
   read further common exception words, noting unusual correspondences between
    spelling and sound and where these occur in the word
   read most words quickly and accurately, without overt sounding and blending, when
    they have been frequently encountered
   read aloud books closely matched to their improving phonic knowledge, sounding out
    unfamiliar words accurately, automatically and without undue hesitation
   re-read these books to build up their fluency and confidence in word reading.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should revise and consolidate the GPCs and the common exception words taught
in year 1. The exception words taught will vary slightly, depending on the phonics
programme being used. As soon as pupils can read words comprising the year 2 GPCs
accurately and speedily, they should move on to the years 3 and 4 programme of study
for word reading.
When pupils are taught how to read longer words, they should be shown syllable boundaries
and how to read each syllable separately before they combine them to read the word.
Pupils should be taught how to read suffixes by building on the root words that they have
already learnt. The whole suffix should be taught as well as the letters that make it up.
Pupils who are still at the early stages of learning to read should have ample practice in
reading books that are closely matched to their developing phonic knowledge and
knowledge of common exception words. As soon as the decoding of most regular words
and common exception words is embedded fully, the range of books that pupils can read
independently will expand rapidly. Pupils should have opportunities to exercise choice in
selecting books and be taught how to do so.


                                                                                          17
English – key stages 1 and 2


Reading – comprehension


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    develop pleasure in reading, motivation to read, vocabulary and understanding by:
          listening to, discussing and expressing views about a wide range of
           contemporary and classic poetry, stories and non-fiction at a level beyond that
           at which they can read independently
          discussing the sequence of events in books and how items of information are
           related
          becoming increasingly familiar with and retelling a wider range of stories, fairy
           stories and traditional tales
          being introduced to non-fiction books that are structured in different ways
          recognising simple recurring literary language in stories and poetry
          discussing and clarifying the meanings of words, linking new meanings to
           known vocabulary
          discussing their favourite words and phrases
          continuing to build up a repertoire of poems learnt by heart, appreciating these
           and reciting some, with appropriate intonation to make the meaning clear
    understand both the books that they can already read accurately and fluently and
     those that they listen to by:
          drawing on what they already know or on background information and
           vocabulary provided by the teacher
          checking that the text makes sense to them as they read and correcting
           inaccurate reading
          making inferences on the basis of what is being said and done
          answering and asking questions
          predicting what might happen on the basis of what has been read so far
    participate in discussion about books, poems and other works that are read to them and
     those that they can read for themselves, taking turns and listening to what others say
    explain and discuss their understanding of books, poems and other material, both
     those that they listen to and those that they read for themselves.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should be encouraged to read all the words in a sentence and to do this
accurately, so that their understanding of what they read is not hindered by imprecise
decoding (for example, by reading ‘place’ instead of ‘palace’).


18
                                                                   English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should monitor what they read, checking that the word they have decoded fits in
with what else they have read and makes sense in the context of what they already
know about the topic.
The meaning of new words should be explained to pupils within the context of what they
are reading, and they should be encouraged to use morphology (such as prefixes) to
work out unknown words.
Pupils should learn about cause and effect in both narrative and non-fiction (for
example, what has prompted a character’s behaviour in a story; why certain dates are
commemorated annually). ‘Thinking aloud’ when reading to pupils may help them to
understand what skilled readers do.
Deliberate steps should be taken to increase pupils’ vocabulary and their awareness of
grammar so that they continue to understand the differences between spoken and
written language.
Discussion should be demonstrated to pupils. They should be guided to participate in it
and they should be helped to consider the opinions of others. They should receive
feedback on their discussions.
Role-play and other drama techniques can help pupils to identify with and explore
characters. In these ways, they extend their understanding of what they read and have
opportunities to try out the language they have listened to.



Writing – transcription


Statutory requirements
Spelling (see English Appendix 1)
Pupils should be taught to:
   spell by:
         segmenting spoken words into phonemes and representing these by
          graphemes, spelling many correctly
         learning new ways of spelling phonemes for which one or more spellings are
          already known, and learn some words with each spelling, including a few
          common homophones
         learning to spell common exception words
         learning to spell more words with contracted forms
         learning the possessive apostrophe (singular) [for example, the girl’s book]
         distinguishing between homophones and near-homophones
   add suffixes to spell longer words, including –ment, –ness, –ful, –less, –ly


                                                                                            19
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
    apply spelling rules and guidance, as listed in English Appendix 1
    write from memory simple sentences dictated by the teacher that include words using
     the GPCs, common exception words and punctuation taught so far.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
In year 2, pupils move towards more word-specific knowledge of spelling, including
homophones. The process of spelling should be emphasised: that is, that spelling
involves segmenting spoken words into phonemes and then representing all the
phonemes by graphemes in the right order. Pupils should do this both for single-syllable
and multi-syllabic words.
At this stage children’s spelling should be phonically plausible, even if not always
correct. Misspellings of words that pupils have been taught to spell should be corrected;
other misspelt words can be used as an opportunity to teach pupils about alternative
ways of representing those sounds.
Pupils should be encouraged to apply their knowledge of suffixes from their word
reading to their spelling. They should also draw from and apply their growing knowledge
of word and spelling structure, as well as their knowledge of root words.



Statutory requirements
Handwriting
Pupils should be taught to:
    form lower-case letters of the correct size relative to one another
    start using some of the diagonal and horizontal strokes needed to join letters and
     understand which letters, when adjacent to one another, are best left unjoined
    write capital letters and digits of the correct size, orientation and relationship to one
     another and to lower case letters
    use spacing between words that reflects the size of the letters.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should revise and practise correct letter formation frequently. They should be
taught to write with a joined style as soon as they can form letters securely with the
correct orientation.




20
                                                                       English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing – composition


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   develop positive attitudes towards and stamina for writing by:
         writing narratives about personal experiences and those of others (real and
          fictional)
         writing about real events
         writing poetry
         writing for different purposes
   consider what they are going to write before beginning by:
         planning or saying out loud what they are going to write about
         writing down ideas and/or key words, including new vocabulary
         encapsulating what they want to say, sentence by sentence
   make simple additions, revisions and corrections to their own writing by:
         evaluating their writing with the teacher and other pupils
         re-reading to check that their writing makes sense and that verbs to indicate
          time are used correctly and consistently, including verbs in the continuous form
         proof-reading to check for errors in spelling, grammar and punctuation [for
          example, ends of sentences punctuated correctly]
   read aloud what they have written with appropriate intonation to make the meaning
    clear.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Reading and listening to whole books, not simply extracts, helps pupils to increase their
vocabulary and grammatical knowledge, including their knowledge of the vocabulary and
grammar of Standard English. These activities also help them to understand how
different types of writing, including narratives, are structured. All these can be drawn on
for their writing.
Pupils should understand, through being shown these, the skills and processes essential
to writing: that is, thinking aloud as they collect ideas, drafting, and re-reading to check
their meaning is clear.
Drama and role-play can contribute to the quality of pupils’ writing by providing
opportunities for pupils to develop and order their ideas through playing roles and
improvising scenes in various settings.
Pupils might draw on and use new vocabulary from their reading, their discussions about
it (one-to-one and as a whole class) and from their wider experiences.


                                                                                                21
English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing – vocabulary, grammar and punctuation


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    develop their understanding of the concepts set out in English Appendix 2 by:
         learning how to use both familiar and new punctuation correctly (see English
          Appendix 2), including full stops, capital letters, exclamation marks, question
          marks, commas for lists and apostrophes for contracted forms and the
          possessive (singular)
    learn how to use:
         sentences with different forms: statement, question, exclamation, command
         expanded noun phrases to describe and specify [for example, the blue butterfly]
         the present and past tenses correctly and consistently including the progressive
          form
         subordination (using when, if, that, or because) and co-ordination (using or,
          and, or but)
         the grammar for year 2 in English Appendix 2
         some features of written Standard English
    use and understand the grammatical terminology in English Appendix 2 in discussing
     their writing.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
The terms for discussing language should be embedded for pupils in the course of
discussing their writing with them. Their attention should be drawn to the technical terms
they need to learn.




22
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2



Lower key stage 2 – years 3 and 4

By the beginning of year 3, pupils should be able to read books written at an age-
appropriate interest level. They should be able to read them accurately and at a speed that
is sufficient for them to focus on understanding what they read rather than on decoding
individual words. They should be able to decode most new words outside their spoken
vocabulary, making a good approximation to the word’s pronunciation. As their decoding
skills become increasingly secure, teaching should be directed more towards developing
their vocabulary and the breadth and depth of their reading, making sure that they become
independent, fluent and enthusiastic readers who read widely and frequently. They should
be developing their understanding and enjoyment of stories, poetry, plays and non-fiction,
and learning to read silently. They should also be developing their knowledge and skills in
reading non-fiction about a wide range of subjects. They should be learning to justify their
views about what they have read: with support at the start of year 3 and increasingly
independently by the end of year 4.

Pupils should be able to write down their ideas with a reasonable degree of accuracy and
with good sentence punctuation. Teachers should therefore be consolidating pupils’ writing
skills, their vocabulary, their grasp of sentence structure and their knowledge of linguistic
terminology. Teaching them to develop as writers involves teaching them to enhance the
effectiveness of what they write as well as increasing their competence. Teachers should
make sure that pupils build on what they have learnt, particularly in terms of the range of
their writing and the more varied grammar, vocabulary and narrative structures from which
they can draw to express their ideas. Pupils should be beginning to understand how
writing can be different from speech. Joined handwriting should be the norm; pupils should
be able to use it fast enough to keep pace with what they want to say.

Pupils’ spelling of common words should be correct, including common exception words
and other words that they have learnt (see English Appendix 1). Pupils should spell words
as accurately as possible using their phonic knowledge and other knowledge of spelling,
such as morphology and etymology.

Most pupils will not need further direct teaching of word reading skills: they are able to
decode unfamiliar words accurately, and need very few repeated experiences of this
before the word is stored in such a way that they can read it without overt sound-blending.
They should demonstrate understanding of figurative language, distinguish shades of
meaning among related words and use age-appropriate, academic vocabulary.

As in key stage 1, however, pupils who are still struggling to decode need to be taught to
do this urgently through a rigorous and systematic phonics programme so that they catch
up rapidly with their peers. If they cannot decode independently and fluently, they will find
it increasingly difficult to understand what they read and to write down what they want to
say. As far as possible, however, these pupils should follow the year 3 and 4 programme


                                                                                             23
English – key stages 1 and 2


of study in terms of listening to new books, hearing and learning new vocabulary and
grammatical structures, and discussing these.

Specific requirements for pupils to discuss what they are learning and to develop their
wider skills in spoken language form part of this programme of study. In years 3 and 4,
pupils should become more familiar with and confident in using language in a greater
variety of situations, for a variety of audiences and purposes, including through drama,
formal presentations and debate.




24
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Years 3 and 4 programme of study

Reading – word reading


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   apply their growing knowledge of root words, prefixes and suffixes (etymology and
    morphology) as listed in English Appendix 1, both to read aloud and to understand
    the meaning of new words they meet
   read further exception words, noting the unusual correspondences between spelling
    and sound, and where these occur in the word.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
At this stage, teaching comprehension should be taking precedence over teaching word
reading directly. Any focus on word reading should support the development of
vocabulary.
When pupils are taught to read longer words, they should be supported to test out
different pronunciations. They will attempt to match what they decode to words they may
have already heard but may not have seen in print [for example, in reading ‘technical’,
the pronunciation /tɛtʃnɪkəl/ (‘tetchnical’) might not sound familiar, but /tɛknɪkəl/
(‘teknical’) should].



Reading – comprehension


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   develop positive attitudes to reading and understanding of what they read by:
        listening to and discussing a wide range of fiction, poetry, plays, non-fiction and
         reference books or textbooks
        reading books that are structured in different ways and reading for a range of
         purposes
        using dictionaries to check the meaning of words that they have read
        increasing their familiarity with a wide range of books, including fairy stories,
         myths and legends, and retelling some of these orally
        identifying themes and conventions in a wide range of books



                                                                                               25
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
          preparing poems and play scripts to read aloud and to perform, showing
           understanding through intonation, tone, volume and action
          discussing words and phrases that capture the reader’s interest and
           imagination
          recognising some different forms of poetry [for example, free verse, narrative
           poetry]
    understand what they read, in books they can read independently, by:
          checking that the text makes sense to them, discussing their understanding and
           explaining the meaning of words in context
          asking questions to improve their understanding of a text
          drawing inferences such as inferring characters’ feelings, thoughts and motives
           from their actions, and justifying inferences with evidence
          predicting what might happen from details stated and implied
          identifying main ideas drawn from more than one paragraph and summarising
           these
          identifying how language, structure, and presentation contribute to meaning
    retrieve and record information from non-fiction
    participate in discussion about both books that are read to them and those they can
     read for themselves, taking turns and listening to what others say.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
The focus should continue to be on pupils’ comprehension as a primary element in
reading. The knowledge and skills that pupils need in order to comprehend are very
similar at different ages. This is why the programmes of study for comprehension in
years 3 and 4 and years 5 and 6 are similar: the complexity of the writing increases the
level of challenge.
Pupils should be taught to recognise themes in what they read, such as the triumph of
good over evil or the use of magical devices in fairy stories and folk tales.
They should also learn the conventions of different types of writing (for example, the
greeting in letters, a diary written in the first person or the use of presentational devices
such as numbering and headings in instructions).
Pupils should be taught to use the skills they have learnt earlier and continue to apply
these skills to read for different reasons, including for pleasure, or to find out information
and the meaning of new words.




26
                                                                      English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should continue to have opportunities to listen frequently to stories, poems, non-
fiction and other writing, including whole books and not just extracts, so that they build
on what was taught previously. In this way, they also meet books and authors that they
might not choose themselves. Pupils should also have opportunities to exercise choice
in selecting books and be taught how to do so, with teachers making use of any library
services and expertise to support this.
Reading, re-reading, and rehearsing poems and plays for presentation and performance
give pupils opportunities to discuss language, including vocabulary, extending their
interest in the meaning and origin of words. Pupils should be encouraged to use drama
approaches to understand how to perform plays and poems to support their
understanding of the meaning. These activities also provide them with an incentive to
find out what expression is required, so feeding into comprehension.
In using non-fiction, pupils should know what information they need to look for before
they begin and be clear about the task. They should be shown how to use contents
pages and indexes to locate information.
Pupils should have guidance about the kinds of explanations and questions that are
expected from them. They should help to develop, agree on, and evaluate rules for
effective discussion. The expectation should be that all pupils take part.



Writing – transcription


Statutory requirements
Spelling (see English Appendix 1)
Pupils should be taught to:
   use further prefixes and suffixes and understand how to add them (English
    Appendix 1)
   spell further homophones
   spell words that are often misspelt (English Appendix 1)
   place the possessive apostrophe accurately in words with regular plurals [for
    example, girls’, boys’] and in words with irregular plurals [for example, children’s]
   use the first two or three letters of a word to check its spelling in a dictionary
   write from memory simple sentences, dictated by the teacher, that include words and
    punctuation taught so far.




                                                                                               27
English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should learn to spell new words correctly and have plenty of practice in spelling
them.
As in years 1 and 2, pupils should continue to be supported in understanding and
applying the concepts of word structure (see English Appendix 2).
Pupils need sufficient knowledge of spelling in order to use dictionaries efficiently.



Statutory requirements
Handwriting
Pupils should be taught to:
    use the diagonal and horizontal strokes that are needed to join letters and
     understand which letters, when adjacent to one another, are best left unjoined
    increase the legibility, consistency and quality of their handwriting [for example, by
     ensuring that the downstrokes of letters are parallel and equidistant; that lines of
     writing are spaced sufficiently so that the ascenders and descenders of letters do not
     touch].


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should be using joined handwriting throughout their independent writing.
Handwriting should continue to be taught, with the aim of increasing the fluency with
which pupils are able to write down what they want to say. This, in turn, will support their
composition and spelling.




28
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing – composition


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   plan their writing by:
         discussing writing similar to that which they are planning to write in order to
          understand and learn from its structure, vocabulary and grammar
         discussing and recording ideas
   draft and write by:
         composing and rehearsing sentences orally (including dialogue), progressively
          building a varied and rich vocabulary and an increasing range of sentence
          structures (English Appendix 2)
         organising paragraphs around a theme
         in narratives, creating settings, characters and plot
         in non-narrative material, using simple organisational devices [for example,
          headings and sub-headings]
   evaluate and edit by:
         assessing the effectiveness of their own and others’ writing and suggesting
          improvements
         proposing changes to grammar and vocabulary to improve consistency,
          including the accurate use of pronouns in sentences
   proof-read for spelling and punctuation errors
   read aloud their own writing, to a group or the whole class, using appropriate
    intonation and controlling the tone and volume so that the meaning is clear.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should continue to have opportunities to write for a range of real purposes and
audiences as part of their work across the curriculum. These purposes and audiences
should underpin the decisions about the form the writing should take, such as a
narrative, an explanation or a description.
Pupils should understand, through being shown these, the skills and processes that are
essential for writing: that is, thinking aloud to explore and collect ideas, drafting, and
re-reading to check their meaning is clear, including doing so as the writing develops.
Pupils should be taught to monitor whether their own writing makes sense in the same
way that they monitor their reading, checking at different levels.




                                                                                              29
English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing – vocabulary, grammar and punctuation


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    develop their understanding of the concepts set out in English Appendix 2 by:
         extending the range of sentences with more than one clause by using a wider
          range of conjunctions, including when, if, because, although
         using the present perfect form of verbs in contrast to the past tense
         choosing nouns or pronouns appropriately for clarity and cohesion and to avoid
          repetition
         using conjunctions, adverbs and prepositions to express time and cause
         using fronted adverbials
         learning the grammar for years 3 and 4 in English Appendix 2
    indicate grammatical and other features by:
         using commas after fronted adverbials
         indicating possession by using the possessive apostrophe with plural nouns
         using and punctuating direct speech
    use and understand the grammatical terminology in English Appendix 2 accurately
     and appropriately when discussing their writing and reading.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Grammar should be taught explicitly: pupils should be taught the terminology and
concepts set out in English Appendix 2, and be able to apply them correctly to examples
of real language, such as their own writing or books that they have read.
At this stage, pupils should start to learn about some of the differences between
Standard English and non-Standard English and begin to apply what they have learnt
[for example, in writing dialogue for characters].




30
                                                                      English – key stages 1 and 2



Upper key stage 2 – years 5 and 6

By the beginning of year 5, pupils should be able to read aloud a wider range of poetry and
books written at an age-appropriate interest level with accuracy and at a reasonable
speaking pace. They should be able to read most words effortlessly and to work out how
to pronounce unfamiliar written words with increasing automaticity. If the pronunciation
sounds unfamiliar, they should ask for help in determining both the meaning of the word
and how to pronounce it correctly.

They should be able to prepare readings, with appropriate intonation to show their
understanding, and should be able to summarise and present a familiar story in their own
words. They should be reading widely and frequently, outside as well as in school, for
pleasure and information. They should be able to read silently, with good understanding,
inferring the meanings of unfamiliar words, and then discuss what they have read.

Pupils should be able to write down their ideas quickly. Their grammar and punctuation
should be broadly accurate. Pupils’ spelling of most words taught so far should be
accurate and they should be able to spell words that they have not yet been taught by
using what they have learnt about how spelling works in English.

During years 5 and 6, teachers should continue to emphasise pupils’ enjoyment and
understanding of language, especially vocabulary, to support their reading and writing.
Pupils’ knowledge of language, gained from stories, plays, poetry, non-fiction and
textbooks, will support their increasing fluency as readers, their facility as writers, and their
comprehension. As in years 3 and 4, pupils should be taught to enhance the effectiveness
of their writing as well as their competence.

It is essential that pupils whose decoding skills are poor are taught through a rigorous and
systematic phonics programme so that they catch up rapidly with their peers in terms of
their decoding and spelling. However, as far as possible, these pupils should follow the
upper key stage 2 programme of study in terms of listening to books and other writing that
they have not come across before, hearing and learning new vocabulary and grammatical
structures, and having a chance to talk about all of these.

By the end of year 6, pupils’ reading and writing should be sufficiently fluent and effortless
for them to manage the general demands of the curriculum in year 7, across all subjects
and not just in English, but there will continue to be a need for pupils to learn subject-
specific vocabulary. They should be able to reflect their understanding of the audience for
and purpose of their writing by selecting appropriate vocabulary and grammar. Teachers
should prepare pupils for secondary education by ensuring that they can consciously
control sentence structure in their writing and understand why sentences are constructed
as they are. Pupils should understand nuances in vocabulary choice and age-appropriate,
academic vocabulary. This involves consolidation, practice and discussion of language.


                                                                                               31
English – key stages 1 and 2


Specific requirements for pupils to discuss what they are learning and to develop their
wider skills in spoken language form part of this programme of study. In years 5 and 6,
pupils’ confidence, enjoyment and mastery of language should be extended through public
speaking, performance and debate.




32
                                                                      English – key stages 1 and 2


Years 5 and 6 programme of study

Reading – word reading


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   apply their growing knowledge of root words, prefixes and suffixes (morphology and
    etymology), as listed in English Appendix 1, both to read aloud and to understand the
    meaning of new words that they meet.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
At this stage, there should be no need for further direct teaching of word reading skills
for almost all pupils. If pupils are struggling or failing in this, the reasons for this should
be investigated. It is imperative that pupils are taught to read during their last two years
at primary school if they enter year 5 not being able to do so.
Pupils should be encouraged to work out any unfamiliar word. They should focus on all
the letters in a word so that they do not, for example, read ‘invitation’ for ‘imitation’
simply because they might be more familiar with the first word. Accurate reading of
individual words, which might be key to the meaning of a sentence or paragraph,
improves comprehension.
When teachers are reading with or to pupils, attention should be paid to new vocabulary
– both a word’s meaning(s) and its correct pronunciation.



Reading – comprehension


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   maintain positive attitudes to reading and understanding of what they read by:
        continuing to read and discuss an increasingly wide range of fiction, poetry,
         plays, non-fiction and reference books or textbooks
        reading books that are structured in different ways and reading for a range of
         purposes
        increasing their familiarity with a wide range of books, including myths, legends
         and traditional stories, modern fiction, fiction from our literary heritage, and
         books from other cultures and traditions




                                                                                                  33
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
          recommending books that they have read to their peers, giving reasons for their
           choices
          identifying and discussing themes and conventions in and across a wide range
           of writing
          making comparisons within and across books
          learning a wider range of poetry by heart
          preparing poems and plays to read aloud and to perform, showing
           understanding through intonation, tone and volume so that the meaning is clear
           to an audience
    understand what they read by:
          checking that the book makes sense to them, discussing their understanding
           and exploring the meaning of words in context
          asking questions to improve their understanding
          drawing inferences such as inferring characters’ feelings, thoughts and motives
           from their actions, and justifying inferences with evidence
          predicting what might happen from details stated and implied
          summarising the main ideas drawn from more than one paragraph, identifying
           key details that support the main ideas
          identifying how language, structure and presentation contribute to meaning
    discuss and evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language,
     considering the impact on the reader
    distinguish between statements of fact and opinion
    retrieve, record and present information from non-fiction
    participate in discussions about books that are read to them and those they can read
     for themselves, building on their own and others’ ideas and challenging views
     courteously
    explain and discuss their understanding of what they have read, including through
     formal presentations and debates, maintaining a focus on the topic and using notes
     where necessary
    provide reasoned justifications for their views.




34
                                                                  English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Even though pupils can now read independently, reading aloud to them should include
whole books so that they meet books and authors that they might not choose to read
themselves.

The knowledge and skills that pupils need in order to comprehend are very similar at
different ages. Pupils should continue to apply what they have already learnt to more
complex writing.
Pupils should be taught to recognise themes in what they read, such as loss or heroism.
They should have opportunities to compare characters, consider different accounts of
the same event and discuss viewpoints (both of authors and of fictional characters),
within a text and across more than one text.
They should continue to learn the conventions of different types of writing, such as the
use of the first person in writing diaries and autobiographies.
Pupils should be taught the technical and other terms needed for discussing what they
hear and read, such as metaphor, simile, analogy, imagery, style and effect.
In using reference books, pupils need to know what information they need to look for
before they begin and need to understand the task. They should be shown how to use
contents pages and indexes to locate information.
The skills of information retrieval that are taught should be applied, for example, in
reading history, geography and science textbooks, and in contexts where pupils are
genuinely motivated to find out information, for example, reading information leaflets
before a gallery or museum visit or reading a theatre programme or review. Teachers
should consider making use of any library services and expertise to support this.
Pupils should have guidance about and feedback on the quality of their explanations and
contributions to discussions.
Pupils should be shown how to compare characters, settings, themes and other aspects
of what they read.




                                                                                           35
English – key stages 1 and 2


Writing – transcription


Statutory requirements
Spelling (see English Appendix 1)
Pupils should be taught to:
    use further prefixes and suffixes and understand the guidance for adding them
    spell some words with ‘silent’ letters [for example, knight, psalm, solemn]
    continue to distinguish between homophones and other words which are often
     confused
    use knowledge of morphology and etymology in spelling and understand that the
     spelling of some words needs to be learnt specifically, as listed in English Appendix 1
    use dictionaries to check the spelling and meaning of words
    use the first three or four letters of a word to check spelling, meaning or both of these
     in a dictionary
    use a thesaurus.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
As in earlier years, pupils should continue to be taught to understand and apply the
concepts of word structure so that they can draw on their knowledge of morphology and
etymology to spell correctly.



Statutory requirements
Handwriting and presentation
Pupils should be taught to:
    write legibly, fluently and with increasing speed by:
          choosing which shape of a letter to use when given choices and deciding
           whether or not to join specific letters
          choosing the writing implement that is best suited for a task.




36
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should continue to practise handwriting and be encouraged to increase the speed
of it, so that problems with forming letters do not get in the way of their writing down
what they want to say. They should be clear about what standard of handwriting is
appropriate for a particular task, for example, quick notes or a final handwritten version.
They should also be taught to use an unjoined style, for example, for labelling a diagram
or data, writing an email address, or for algebra and capital letters, for example, for filling
in a form.



Writing – composition


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
   plan their writing by:
         identifying the audience for and purpose of the writing, selecting the appropriate
          form and using other similar writing as models for their own
         noting and developing initial ideas, drawing on reading and research where
          necessary
         in writing narratives, considering how authors have developed characters and
          settings in what pupils have read, listened to or seen performed
   draft and write by:
         selecting appropriate grammar and vocabulary, understanding how such
          choices can change and enhance meaning
         in narratives, describing settings, characters and atmosphere and integrating
          dialogue to convey character and advance the action
         précising longer passages
         using a wide range of devices to build cohesion within and across paragraphs
         using further organisational and presentational devices to structure text and to
          guide the reader [for example, headings, bullet points, underlining]
   evaluate and edit by:
         assessing the effectiveness of their own and others’ writing
         proposing changes to vocabulary, grammar and punctuation to enhance effects
          and clarify meaning
         ensuring the consistent and correct use of tense throughout a piece of writing
         ensuring correct subject and verb agreement when using singular and plural,
          distinguishing between the language of speech and writing and choosing the
          appropriate register
   proof-read for spelling and punctuation errors


                                                                                              37
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory requirements
    perform their own compositions, using appropriate intonation, volume, and
     movement so that meaning is clear.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should understand, through being shown, the skills and processes essential for
writing: that is, thinking aloud to generate ideas, drafting, and re-reading to check that
the meaning is clear.



Writing – vocabulary, grammar and punctuation


Statutory requirements
Pupils should be taught to:
    develop their understanding of the concepts set out in English Appendix 2 by:
         recognising vocabulary and structures that are appropriate for formal speech
          and writing, including subjunctive forms
         using passive verbs to affect the presentation of information in a sentence
         using the perfect form of verbs to mark relationships of time and cause
         using expanded noun phrases to convey complicated information concisely
         using modal verbs or adverbs to indicate degrees of possibility
         using relative clauses beginning with who, which, where, when, whose, that or
          with an implied (i.e. omitted) relative pronoun
         learning the grammar for years 5 and 6 in English Appendix 2
    indicate grammatical and other features by:
         using commas to clarify meaning or avoid ambiguity in writing
         using hyphens to avoid ambiguity
         using brackets, dashes or commas to indicate parenthesis
         using semi-colons, colons or dashes to mark boundaries between independent
          clauses
         using a colon to introduce a list
         punctuating bullet points consistently
    use and understand the grammatical terminology in English Appendix 2 accurately
     and appropriately in discussing their writing and reading.


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Pupils should continue to add to their knowledge of linguistic terms, including those to
describe grammar, so that they can discuss their writing and reading.


38
                                                                   English – key stages 1 and 2



English Appendix 1: Spelling

Most people read words more accurately than they spell them. The younger pupils are, the
truer this is.

By the end of year 1, pupils should be able to read a large number of different words
containing the GPCs that they have learnt, whether or not they have seen these words
before. Spelling, however, is a very different matter. Once pupils have learnt more than
one way of spelling particular sounds, choosing the right letter or letters depends on their
either having made a conscious effort to learn the words or having absorbed them less
consciously through their reading. Younger pupils have not had enough time to learn or
absorb the accurate spelling of all the words that they may want to write.

This appendix provides examples of words embodying each pattern which is taught. Many
of the words listed as ‘example words’ for years 1 and 2, including almost all those listed
as ‘exception words’, are used frequently in pupils’ writing, and therefore it is worth pupils
learning the correct spelling. The ‘exception words’ contain GPCs which have not yet been
taught as widely applicable, but this may be because they are applicable in very few age-
appropriate words rather than because they are rare in English words in general.

The word-lists for years 3 and 4 and years 5 and 6 are statutory. The lists are a mixture of
words pupils frequently use in their writing and those which they often misspell. Some of
the listed words may be thought of as quite challenging, but the 100 words in each list can
easily be taught within the four years of key stage 2 alongside other words that teachers
consider appropriate.

The rules and guidance are intended to support the teaching of spelling. Phonic knowledge
should continue to underpin spelling after key stage 1; teachers should still draw pupils’
attention to GPCs that do and do not fit in with what has been taught so far. Increasingly,
however, pupils also need to understand the role of morphology and etymology. Although
particular GPCs in root words simply have to be learnt, teachers can help pupils to
understand relationships between meaning and spelling where these are relevant. For
example, understanding the relationship between medical and medicine may help pupils to
spell the /s/ sound in medicine with the letter ‘c’. Pupils can also be helped to spell words
with prefixes and suffixes correctly if they understand some general principles for adding
them. Teachers should be familiar with what pupils have been taught about spelling in
earlier years, such as which rules pupils have been taught for adding prefixes and suffixes.

In this spelling appendix, the left-hand column is statutory; the middle and right-
hand columns are non-statutory guidance.

The International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) is used to represent sounds (phonemes).
A table showing the IPA is provided in this document.


                                                                                            39
English – key stages 1 and 2



Spelling – work for year 1

Revision of reception work


Statutory requirements
The boundary between revision of work covered in Reception and the introduction of
new work may vary according to the programme used, but basic revision should include:
    all letters of the alphabet and the sounds which they most commonly represent
    consonant digraphs which have been taught and the sounds which they represent
    vowel digraphs which have been taught and the sounds which they represent
    the process of segmenting spoken words into sounds before choosing graphemes to
     represent the sounds
    words with adjacent consonants
    guidance and rules which have been taught



Statutory                  Rules and guidance (non-statutory)          Example words
requirements                                                           (non-statutory)
The sounds /f/, /l/,       The /f/, /l/, /s/, /z/ and /k/ sounds are   off, well, miss, buzz,
/s/, /z/ and /k/ spelt     usually spelt as ff, ll, ss, zz and ck if   back
ff, ll, ss, zz and ck      they come straight after a single vowel
                           letter in short words. Exceptions: if,
                           pal, us, bus, yes.
The /ŋ/ sound spelt                                                    bank, think, honk,
n before k                                                             sunk
Division of words          Each syllable is like a ‘beat’ in the       pocket, rabbit, carrot,
into syllables             spoken word. Words of more than one         thunder, sunset
                           syllable often have an unstressed
                           syllable in which the vowel sound is
                           unclear.




40
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory              Rules and guidance (non-statutory)              Example words
requirements                                                           (non-statutory)
-tch                   The /tʃ/ sound is usually spelt as tch if it catch, fetch, kitchen,
                       comes straight after a single vowel          notch, hutch
                       letter. Exceptions: rich, which, much,
                       such.
The /v/ sound at the   English words hardly ever end with the          have, live, give
end of words           letter v, so if a word ends with a /v/
                       sound, the letter e usually needs to be
                       added after the ‘v’.
Adding s and es to     If the ending sounds like /s/ or /z/, it is     cats, dogs, spends,
words (plural of       spelt as –s. If the ending sounds like          rocks, thanks,
nouns and the third    /ɪz/ and forms an extra syllable or ‘beat’      catches
person singular of     in the word, it is spelt as –es.
verbs)
Adding the endings     –ing and –er always add an extra                hunting, hunted,
–ing, –ed and –er to   syllable to the word and –ed sometimes          hunter, buzzing,
verbs where no         does.                                           buzzed, buzzer,
change is needed       The past tense of some verbs may                jumping, jumped,
to the root word       sound as if it ends in /ɪd/ (extra              jumper
                       syllable), /d/ or /t/ (no extra syllable),
                       but all these endings are spelt –ed.
                       If the verb ends in two consonant letters
                       (the same or different), the ending is
                       simply added on.
Adding –er and –est    As with verbs (see above), if the               grander, grandest,
to adjectives where    adjective ends in two consonant letters         fresher, freshest,
no change is           (the same or different), the ending is          quicker, quickest
needed to the root     simply added on.
word




                                                                                              41
English – key stages 1 and 2


Vowel digraphs and trigraphs
Some may already be known, depending on the programmes used in Reception, but some
will be new.

Vowel                Rules and guidance                     Example words
digraphs             (non-statutory)                        (non-statutory)
and trigraphs
ai, oi               The digraphs ai and oi are virtually   rain, wait, train, paid, afraid
                     never used at the end of English       oil, join, coin, point, soil
                     words.
ay, oy               ay and oy are used for those           day, play, say, way, stay
                     sounds at the end of words and at      boy, toy, enjoy, annoy
                     the end of syllables.
a–e                                                         made, came, same, take, safe
e–e                                                         these, theme, complete
i–e                                                         five, ride, like, time, side
o–e                                                         home, those, woke, hope, hole
u–e                  Both the /u:/ and /ju:/ (‘oo’ and      June, rule, rude, use, tube, tune
                     ‘yoo’) sounds can be spelt as u–e.
ar                                                          car, start, park, arm, garden
ee                                                          see, tree, green, meet, week
ea (/i:/)                                                   sea, dream, meat, each,
                                                            read (present tense)
ea (/ɛ/)                                                    head, bread, meant, instead,
                                                            read (past tense)
er (/ɜ:/)                                                   (stressed sound): her, term,
                                                            verb, person
er (/ə/)                                                    (unstressed schwa sound):
                                                            better, under, summer, winter,
                                                            sister
ir                                                          girl, bird, shirt, first, third
ur                                                          turn, hurt, church, burst,
                                                            Thursday




42
                                                               English – key stages 1 and 2


Vowel           Rules and guidance                   Example words
digraphs        (non-statutory)                      (non-statutory)
and trigraphs
oo (/u:/)       Very few words end with the          food, pool, moon, zoo, soon
                letters oo, although the few that
                do are often words that primary
                children in year 1 will encounter,
                for example, zoo
oo (/ʊ/)                                             book, took, foot, wood, good
oa              The digraph oa is very rare at the   boat, coat, road, coach, goal
                end of an English word.
oe                                                   toe, goes
ou              The only common English word         out, about, mouth, around,
                ending in ou is you.                 sound
ow (/aʊ/)       Both the /u:/ and /ju:/ (‘oo’ and    now, how, brown, down, town
ow (/əʊ/)       ‘yoo’) sounds can be spelt as u–e,   own, blow, snow, grow, show
ue              ue and ew. If words end in the       blue, clue, true, rescue, Tuesday
                /oo/ sound, ue and ew are more       new, few, grew, flew, drew, threw
ew
                common spellings than oo.
ie (/aɪ/)                                            lie, tie, pie, cried, tried, dried
ie (/i:/)                                            chief, field, thief
igh                                                  high, night, light, bright, right
or                                                   for, short, born, horse, morning
ore                                                  more, score, before, wore, shore
aw                                                   saw, draw, yawn, crawl
au                                                   author, August, dinosaur,
                                                     astronaut
air                                                  air, fair, pair, hair, chair
ear                                                  dear, hear, beard, near, year
ear (/ɛə/)                                           bear, pear, wear
are (/ɛə/)                                           bare, dare, care, share, scared




                                                                                          43
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory               Rules and guidance             Example words (non-statutory)
requirements            (non-statutory)
Words ending –y                                        very, happy, funny, party, family
(/i:/ or /ɪ/)
New consonant           The /f/ sound is not usually   dolphin, alphabet, phonics, elephant
spellings ph and        spelt as ph in short           when, where, which, wheel, while
wh                      everyday words (e.g. fat,
                        fill, fun).
Using k for the /k/     The /k/ sound is spelt as k    Kent, sketch, kit, skin, frisky
sound                   rather than as c before e, i
                        and y.
Adding the prefix       The prefix un– is added to     unhappy, undo, unload, unfair,
–un                     the beginning of a word        unlock
                        without any change to the
                        spelling of the root word.
Compound                Compound words are two         football, playground, farmyard,
words                   words joined together.         bedroom, blackberry
                        Each part of the longer
                        word is spelt as it would be
                        if it were on its own.
Common                  Pupils’ attention should be    the, a, do, to, today, of, said, says,
exception words         drawn to the grapheme-         are, were, was, is, his, has, I, you,
                        phoneme                        your, they, be, he, me, she, we, no,
                        correspondences that do        go, so, by, my, here, there, where,
                        and do not fit in with what    love, come, some, one, once, ask,
                        has been taught so far.        friend, school, put, push, pull, full,
                                                       house, our – and/or others,
                                                       according to the programme used




44
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2



Spelling – work for year 2

Revision of work from year 1

As words with new GPCs are introduced, many previously-taught GPCs can be revised at
the same time as these words will usually contain them.



New work for year 2


Statutory                 Rules and guidance                         Example words
requirements              (non-statutory)                            (non-statutory)
The /dʒ/ sound spelt      The letter j is never used for the /dʒ/
as ge and dge at the      sound at the end of English words.
end of words, and         At the end of a word, the /dʒ/ sound       badge, edge, bridge,
sometimes spelt as g      is spelt –dge straight after the /æ/,      dodge, fudge
elsewhere in words        /ɛ/, /ɪ/, /ɒ/, /ʌ/ and /ʊ/ sounds
before e, i and y         (sometimes called ‘short’ vowels).
                          After all other sounds, whether            age, huge, change,
                          vowels or consonants, the /dʒ/ sound       charge, bulge, village
                          is spelt as –ge at the end of a word.
                          In other positions in words, the /dʒ/      gem, giant, magic,
                          sound is often (but not always) spelt      giraffe, energy
                          as g before e, i, and y. The /dʒ/          jacket, jar, jog, join,
                          sound is always spelt as j before a, o     adjust
                          and u.
The /s/ sound spelt c                                                race, ice, cell, city,
before e, i and y                                                    fancy
The /n/ sound spelt       The ‘k’ and ‘g’ at the beginning of        knock, know, knee,
kn and (less often) gn    these words was sounded hundreds           gnat, gnaw
at the beginning of       of years ago.
words
The /r/ sound spelt wr    This spelling probably also reflects       write, written, wrote,
at the beginning of       an old pronunciation.                      wrong, wrap
words
The /l/ or /əl/ sound     The –le spelling is the most common        table, apple, bottle,
spelt –le at the end of   spelling for this sound at the end of      little, middle
words                     words.




                                                                                               45
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory                      Rules and guidance                         Example words
requirements                   (non-statutory)                            (non-statutory)
The /l/ or /əl/ sound          The –el spelling is much less              camel, tunnel, squirrel,
spelt –el at the end of        common than –le.                           travel, towel, tinsel
words                          The –el spelling is used after m, n,
                               r, s, v, w and more often than not
                               after s.
The /l/ or /əl/ sound          Not many nouns end in –al, but             metal, pedal, capital,
spelt –al at the end of        many adjectives do.                        hospital, animal
words
Words ending –il               There are not many of these words.         pencil, fossil, nostril
The /aɪ/ sound spelt           This is by far the most common             cry, fly, dry, try, reply,
–y at the end of               spelling for this sound at the end of      July
words                          words.
Adding –es to nouns            The y is changed to i before –es is        flies, tries, replies,
and verbs ending in            added.                                     copies, babies, carries
–y
Adding –ed, –ing, –er          The y is changed to i before –ed, –er      copied, copier,
and –est to a root             and –est are added, but not before –       happier, happiest,
word ending in –y              ing as this would result in ii. The        cried, replied
with a consonant               only ordinary words with ii are skiing     …but copying, crying,
before it                      and taxiing.                               replying
Adding the endings –           The –e at the end of the root word is hiking, hiked, hiker,
ing, –ed, –er, –est            dropped before –ing, –ed, –er,         nicer, nicest, shiny
and –y to words                –est, –y or any other suffix beginning
ending in –e with a            with a vowel letter is added.
consonant before it            Exception: being.
Adding –ing, –ed,              The last consonant letter of the root      patting, patted,
–er, –est and –y to            word is doubled to keep the /æ/, /ɛ/,      humming, hummed,
words of one syllable          /ɪ/, /ɒ/ and /ʌ/ sound (i.e. to keep the   dropping, dropped,
ending in a single             vowel ‘short’).                            sadder, saddest,
consonant letter after         Exception: The letter ‘x’ is never         fatter, fattest, runner,
a single vowel letter          doubled: mixing, mixed, boxer, sixes.      runny

The /ɔ:/ sound spelt a         The /ɔ:/ sound (‘or’) is usually spelt     all, ball, call, walk, talk,
before l and ll                as a before l and ll.                      always

The /ʌ/ sound spelt o                                                     other, mother, brother,
                                                                          nothing, Monday




46
                                                                   English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory               Rules and guidance                          Example words
requirements            (non-statutory)                             (non-statutory)
The /i:/ sound spelt    The plural of these words is formed         key, donkey, monkey,
–ey                     by the addition of –s (donkeys,             chimney, valley
                        monkeys, etc.).
The /ɒ/ sound spelt a   a is the most common spelling for           want, watch, wander,
after w and qu          the /ɒ/ (‘hot’) sound after w and qu.       quantity, squash
The /ɜ:/ sound spelt    There are not many of these words.          word, work, worm,
or after w                                                          world, worth
The /ɔ:/ sound spelt    There are not many of these words.          war, warm, towards
ar after w
The /ʒ/ sound spelt s                                               television, treasure,
                                                                    usual
The suffixes –ment,     If a suffix starts with a consonant         enjoyment, sadness,
–ness, –ful , –less     letter, it is added straight on to most     careful, playful,
and –ly                 root words without any change to the        hopeless, plainness
                        last letter of those words.                 (plain + ness), badly
                        Exceptions:
                        (1) argument
                        (2) root words ending in –y with a          merriment, happiness,
                        consonant before it but only if the         plentiful, penniless,
                        root word has more than one                 happily
                        syllable.
Contractions            In contractions, the apostrophe             can’t, didn’t, hasn’t,
                        shows where a letter or letters would       couldn’t, it’s, I’ll
                        be if the words were written in full
                        (e.g. can’t – cannot).
                        It’s means it is (e.g. It’s raining) or
                        sometimes it has (e.g. It’s been
                        raining), but it’s is never used for the
                        possessive.
The possessive                                                      Megan’s, Ravi’s, the
apostrophe (singular                                                girl’s, the child’s, the
nouns)                                                              man’s
Words ending in –tion                                               station, fiction, motion,
                                                                    national, section




                                                                                               47
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory                      Rules and guidance                       Example words
requirements                   (non-statutory)                          (non-statutory)
Homophones and                 It is important to know the difference   there/their/they’re,
near-homophones                in meaning between homophones.           here/hear, quite/quiet,
                                                                        see/sea, bare/bear,
                                                                        one/won, sun/son,
                                                                        to/too/two, be/bee,
                                                                        blue/blew, night/knight
Common exception               Some words are exceptions in some        door, floor, poor,
words                          accents but not in others – e.g. past,   because, find, kind,
                               last, fast, path and bath are not        mind, behind, child,
                               exceptions in accents where the a in     children*, wild, climb,
                               these words is pronounced /æ/, as in     most, only, both, old,
                               cat.                                     cold, gold, hold, told,
                               Great, break and steak are the only      every, everybody,
                               common words where the /eɪ/ sound        even, great, break,
                               is spelt ea.                             steak, pretty, beautiful,
                                                                        after, fast, last, past,
                                                                        father, class, grass,
                                                                        pass, plant, path, bath,
                                                                        hour, move, prove,
                                                                        improve, sure, sugar,
                                                                        eye, could, should,
                                                                        would, who, whole,
                                                                        any, many, clothes,
                                                                        busy, people, water,
                                                                        again, half, money,
                                                                        Mr, Mrs, parents,
                                                                        Christmas – and/or
                                                                        others according to
                                                                        programme used.
                                                                        Note: ‘children’ is not
                                                                        an exception to what
                                                                        has been taught so far
                                                                        but is included
                                                                        because of its
                                                                        relationship with
                                                                        ‘child’.




48
                                                                       English – key stages 1 and 2



Spelling – work for years 3 and 4

Revision of work from years 1 and 2

Pay special attention to the rules for adding suffixes.



New work for years 3 and 4


Statutory                   Rules and guidance                          Example words
requirements                (non-statutory)                             (non-statutory)
Adding suffixes             If the last syllable of a word is           forgetting, forgotten,
beginning with vowel        stressed and ends with one                  beginning, beginner,
letters to words of         consonant letter which has just one         prefer, preferred
more than one               vowel letter before it, the final
syllable                    consonant letter is doubled before
                            any ending beginning with a vowel
                            letter is added. The consonant letter       gardening, gardener,
                            is not doubled if the syllable is           limiting, limited,
                            unstressed.                                 limitation
The /ɪ/ sound spelt y       These words should be learnt as             myth, gym, Egypt,
elsewhere than at the       needed.                                     pyramid, mystery
end of words
The /ʌ/ sound spelt         These words should be learnt as             young, touch, double,
ou                          needed.                                     trouble, country
More prefixes               Most prefixes are added to the
                            beginning of root words without any
                            changes in spelling, but see in–
                            below.
                            Like un–, the prefixes dis– and mis–        dis–: disappoint,
                            have negative meanings.                     disagree, disobey
                                                                        mis–: misbehave,
                                                                        mislead, misspell (mis
                                                                        + spell)
                            The prefix in– can mean both ‘not’          in–: inactive, incorrect
                            and ‘in’/‘into’. In the words given here
                            it means ‘not’.




                                                                                                   49
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory                      Rules and guidance                        Example words
requirements                   (non-statutory)                           (non-statutory)
                               Before a root word starting with l, in–   illegal, illegible
                               becomes il.
                               Before a root word starting with m or     immature, immortal,
                               p, in– becomes im–.                       impossible, impatient,
                                                                         imperfect
                               Before a root word starting with r, in– irregular, irrelevant,
                               becomes ir–.                            irresponsible
                               re– means ‘again’ or ‘back’.              re–: redo, refresh,
                                                                         return, reappear,
                                                                         redecorate
                               sub– means ‘under’.                       sub–: subdivide,
                                                                         subheading,
                                                                         submarine, submerge
                               inter– means ‘between’ or ‘among’.        inter–: interact,
                                                                         intercity, international,
                                                                         interrelated (inter +
                                                                         related)
                               super– means ‘above’.                     super–: supermarket,
                                                                         superman, superstar
                               anti– means ‘against’.                    anti–: antiseptic, anti-
                                                                         clockwise, antisocial
                               auto– means ‘self’ or ‘own’.              auto–: autobiography,
                                                                         autograph
The suffix –ation              The suffix –ation is added to verbs       information, adoration,
                               to form nouns. The rules already          sensation,
                               learnt still apply.                       preparation,
                                                                         admiration
The suffix –ly                 The suffix –ly is added to an          sadly, completely,
                               adjective to form an adverb. The       usually (usual + ly),
                               rules already learnt still apply.      finally (final + ly),
                               The suffix –ly starts with a consonant comically (comical
                               letter, so it is added straight on to  + ly)
                               most root words.




50
                                                                  English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory               Rules and guidance                         Example words
requirements            (non-statutory)                            (non-statutory)
                        Exceptions:
                        (1) If the root word ends in –y with a     happily, angrily
                        consonant letter before it, the y is
                        changed to i, but only if the root word
                        has more than one syllable.
                        (2) If the root word ends with –le, the    gently, simply, humbly,
                        –le is changed to –ly.                     nobly
                        (3) If the root word ends with –ic,        basically, frantically,
                        –ally is added rather than just –ly,       dramatically
                        except in the word publicly.
                        (4) The words truly, duly, wholly.
Words with endings      The ending sounding like /ʒə/ is           measure, treasure,
sounding like /ʒə/ or   always spelt –sure.                        pleasure, enclosure
/tʃə/                   The ending sounding like /tʃə/ is          creature, furniture,
                        often spelt –ture, but check that the      picture, nature,
                        word is not a root word ending in          adventure
                        (t)ch with an er ending – e.g.
                        teacher, catcher, richer, stretcher.
Endings which sound     If the ending sounds like /ʒən/, it is     division, invasion,
like /ʒən/              spelt as –sion.                            confusion, decision,
                                                                   collision, television
The suffix –ous         Sometimes the root word is obvious         poisonous, dangerous,
                        and the usual rules apply for adding       mountainous, famous,
                        suffixes beginning with vowel letters.     various
                        Sometimes there is no obvious root         tremendous,
                        word.                                      enormous, jealous
                        –our is changed to –or before –ous         humorous, glamorous,
                        is added.                                  vigorous
                        A final ‘e’ of the root word must be       courageous,
                        kept if the /dʒ/ sound of ‘g’ is to be     outrageous
                        kept.
                        If there is an /i:/ sound before the       serious, obvious,
                        –ous ending, it is usually spelt as i,     curious
                        but a few words have e.                    hideous, spontaneous,
                                                                   courteous




                                                                                             51
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory                      Rules and guidance                         Example words
requirements                   (non-statutory)                            (non-statutory)
Endings which sound            Strictly speaking, the suffixes are –
like /ʃən/, spelt –tion,       ion and –ian. Clues about whether
–sion, –ssion, –cian           to put t, s, ss or c before these
                               suffixes often come from the last
                               letter or letters of the root word.
                               –tion is the most common spelling.         invention, injection,
                               It is used if the root word ends in t or   action, hesitation,
                               te.                                        completion
                               –ssion is used if the root word ends       expression, discussion,
                               in ss or –mit.                             confession,
                                                                          permission, admission
                               –sion is used if the root word ends in     expansion, extension,
                               d or se.                                   comprehension,
                               Exceptions: attend – attention,            tension
                               intend – intention.
                               –cian is used if the root word ends in     musician, electrician,
                               c or cs.                                   magician, politician,
                                                                          mathematician
Words with the /k/                                                        scheme, chorus,
sound spelt ch                                                            chemist, echo,
(Greek in origin)                                                         character
Words with the /ʃ/                                                        chef, chalet, machine,
sound spelt ch                                                            brochure
(mostly French in
origin)
Words ending with                                                         league, tongue,
the /g/ sound spelt –                                                     antique, unique
gue and the /k/ sound
spelt –que (French in
origin)
Words with the /s/             In the Latin words from which these        science, scene,
sound spelt sc (Latin          words come, the Romans probably            discipline, fascinate,
in origin)                     pronounced the c and the k as two          crescent
                               sounds rather than one – /s/ /k/.
Words with the /eɪ/                                                       vein, weigh, eight,
sound spelt ei, eigh,                                                     neighbour, they, obey
or ey




52
                                                             English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory         Rules and guidance                          Example words
requirements      (non-statutory)                             (non-statutory)
Possessive        The apostrophe is placed after the          girls’, boys’, babies’,
apostrophe with   plural form of the word; –s is not          children’s, men’s,
plural words      added if the plural already ends in         mice’s
                  –s, but is added if the plural does not     (Note: singular proper
                  end in –s (i.e. is an irregular plural –    nouns ending in an s
                  e.g. children’s).                           use the ’s suffix e.g.
                                                              Cyprus’s population)
Homophones and                                                accept/except,
near-homophones                                               affect/effect, ball/bawl,
                                                              berry/bury,
                                                              brake/break, fair/fare,
                                                              grate/great,
                                                              groan/grown,
                                                              here/hear,
                                                              heel/heal/he’ll,
                                                              knot/not, mail/male,
                                                              main/mane,
                                                              meat/meet,
                                                              medal/meddle,
                                                              missed/mist,
                                                              peace/piece,
                                                              plain/plane,
                                                              rain/rein/reign,
                                                              scene/seen,
                                                              weather/whether,
                                                              whose/who’s




                                                                                        53
English – key stages 1 and 2



Word list – years 3 and 4

accident(ally)           early                 knowledge              purpose
actual(ly)               earth                 learn                  quarter
address                  eight/eighth          length                 question
answer                   enough                library                recent
appear                   exercise              material               regular
arrive                   experience            medicine               reign
believe                  experiment            mention                remember
bicycle                  extreme               minute                 sentence
breath                   famous                natural                separate
breathe                  favourite             naughty                special
build                    February              notice                 straight
busy/business            forward(s)            occasion(ally)         strange
calendar                 fruit                 often                  strength
caught                   grammar               opposite               suppose
centre                   group                 ordinary               surprise
century                  guard                 particular             therefore
certain                  guide                 peculiar               though/although
circle                   heard                 perhaps                thought
complete                 heart                 popular                through
consider                 height                position               various
continue                 history               possess(ion)           weight
decide                   imagine               possible               woman/women
describe                 increase              potatoes
different                important             pressure
difficult                interest              probably
disappear                island                promise



Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Teachers should continue to emphasise to pupils the relationships between sounds and
letters, even when the relationships are unusual. Once root words are learnt in this way,
longer words can be spelt correctly, if the rules and guidance for adding prefixes and
suffixes are also known.




54
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Examples:
business: once busy is learnt, with due attention to the unusual spelling of the /i/ sound
as ‘u’, business can then be spelt as busy + ness, with the y of busy changed to i
according to the rule.

disappear: the root word appear contains sounds which can be spelt in more than one
way so it needs to be learnt, but the prefix dis– is then simply added to appear.

Understanding the relationships between words can also help with spelling. Examples:
   bicycle is cycle (from the Greek for wheel) with bi– (meaning ‘two’) before it.
   medicine is related to medical so the /s/ sound is spelt as c.
   opposite is related to oppose, so the schwa sound in opposite is spelt as o.




                                                                                              55
English – key stages 1 and 2



Spelling – years 5 and 6

Revise work done in previous years


New work for years 5 and 6


Statutory             Rules and guidance (non-statutory)         Example words
requirements                                                     (non-statutory)

Endings which         Not many common words end like this.       vicious, precious,
sound like /ʃəs/      If the root word ends in –ce, the /ʃ/      conscious, delicious,
spelt –cious or       sound is usually spelt as c – e.g. vice    malicious, suspicious
–tious                – vicious, grace – gracious, space –       ambitious, cautious,
                      spacious, malice – malicious.              fictitious, infectious,
                      Exception: anxious.                        nutritious

Endings which         –cial is common after a vowel letter       official, special, artificial,
sound like /ʃəl/      and –tial after a consonant letter, but    partial, confidential,
                      there are some exceptions.                 essential
                      Exceptions: initial, financial,
                      commercial, provincial (the spelling of
                      the last three is clearly related to
                      finance, commerce and province).
Words ending          Use –ant and –ance/–ancy if there is       observant, observance,
in –ant,              a related word with a /æ/ or /eɪ/ sound    (observation), expectant
–ance/–ancy,          in the right position; –ation endings      (expectation), hesitant,
–ent,                 are often a clue.                          hesitancy (hesitation),
–ence/–ency                                                      tolerant, tolerance
                                                                 (toleration), substance
                                                                 (substantial)
                      Use –ent and –ence/–ency after soft        innocent, innocence,
                      c (/s/ sound), soft g (/dʒ/ sound) and     decent, decency, frequent,
                      qu, or if there is a related word with a   frequency, confident,
                      clear /ɛ/ sound in the right position.     confidence (confidential)
                      There are many words, however,             assistant, assistance,
                      where the above guidance does not          obedient, obedience,
                      help. These words just have to be          independent,
                      learnt.                                    independence




56
                                                                  English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory          Rules and guidance (non-statutory)         Example words
requirements                                                  (non-statutory)
Words ending       The –able/–ably endings are far more       adorable/adorably
in –able and       common than the –ible/–ibly endings.       (adoration),
–ible              As with –ant and –ance/–ancy, the –       applicable/applicably
Words ending       able ending is used if there is a related (application),
in –ably and       word ending in –ation.                    considerable/considerably
–ibly                                                        (consideration),
                                                             tolerable/tolerably
                                                             (toleration)
                   If the –able ending is added to a word     changeable, noticeable,
                   ending in –ce or –ge, the e after the c    forcible, legible
                   or g must be kept as those letters
                   would otherwise have their ‘hard’
                   sounds (as in cap and gap) before the
                   a of the –able ending.
                   The –able ending is usually but not        dependable, comfortable,
                   always used if a complete root word        understandable,
                   can be heard before it, even if there is   reasonable, enjoyable,
                   no related word ending in –ation.          reliable
                   The first five examples opposite are
                   obvious; in reliable, the complete word
                   rely is heard, but the y changes to i in
                   accordance with the rule.
                   The –ible ending is common if a            possible/possibly,
                   complete root word can’t be heard          horrible/horribly,
                   before it but it also sometimes occurs     terrible/terribly,
                   when a complete word can be heard          visible/visibly,
                   (e.g. sensible).                           incredible/incredibly,
                                                              sensible/sensibly
Adding suffixes    The r is doubled if the –fer is still      referring, referred, referral,
beginning with     stressed when the ending is added.         preferring, preferred,
vowel letters to                                              transferring, transferred
words ending       The r is not doubled if the –fer is no     reference, referee,
in –fer            longer stressed.                           preference, transference
Use of the         Hyphens can be used to join a prefix       co-ordinate, re-enter,
hyphen             to a root word, especially if the prefix   co-operate, co-own
                   ends in a vowel letter and the root
                   word also begins with one.




                                                                                               57
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory             Rules and guidance (non-statutory)          Example words
requirements                                                      (non-statutory)
Words with the        The ‘i before e except after c’ rule        deceive, conceive, receive,
/i:/ sound spelt      applies to words where the sound            perceive, ceiling
ei after c            spelt by ei is /i:/.
                      Exceptions: protein, caffeine, seize
                      (and either and neither if pronounced
                      with an initial /i:/ sound).
Words                 ough is one of the trickiest spellings in   ought, bought, thought,
containing the        English – it can be used to spell a         nought, brought, fought
letter-string         number of different sounds.                 rough, tough, enough
ough
                                                                  cough
                                                                  though, although, dough
                                                                  through
                                                                  thorough, borough
                                                                  plough, bough
Words with            Some letters which are no longer            doubt, island, lamb,
‘silent’ letters      sounded used to be sounded                  solemn, thistle, knight
(i.e. letters         hundreds of years ago: e.g. in knight,
whose                 there was a /k/ sound before the /n/,
presence              and the gh used to represent the
cannot be             sound that ‘ch’ now represents in the
predicted from        Scottish word loch.
the
pronunciation
of the word)




58
                                                                  English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory        Rules and guidance (non-statutory)            Example words
requirements                                                   (non-statutory)
Homophones       In the pairs of words opposite, nouns         advice/advise
and other        end –ce and verbs end –se. Advice             device/devise
words that are   and advise provide a useful clue as
                                                               licence/license
often confused   the word advise (verb) is pronounced
                                                               practice/practise
                 with a /z/ sound – which could not be
                 spelt c.                                      prophecy/prophesy


                 More examples:                                farther: further
                                                               father: a male parent
                 aisle: a gangway between seats (in a
                 church, train, plane).                        guessed: past tense of the
                 isle: an island.                              verb guess
                                                               guest: visitor
                 aloud: out loud.
                 allowed: permitted.                           heard: past tense of the verb
                                                               hear
                 affect: usually a verb (e.g. The
                                                               herd: a group of animals
                 weather may affect our plans).
                 effect: usually a noun (e.g. It may have      led: past tense of the verb
                 an effect on our plans). If a verb, it        lead
                 means ‘bring about’ (e.g. He will effect      lead: present tense of that
                 changes in the running of the business).      verb, or else the metal which
                                                               is very heavy (as heavy as
                 altar: a table-like piece of furniture in a
                                                               lead)
                 church.
                 alter: to change.                             morning: before noon
                                                               mourning: grieving for
                 ascent: the act of ascending (going up).
                                                               someone who has died
                 assent: to agree/agreement (verb and
                 noun).                                      past: noun or adjective
                                                             referring to a previous time
                 bridal: to do with a bride at a wedding.
                                                             (e.g. In the past) or
                 bridle: reins etc. for controlling a horse.
                                                             preposition or adverb
                 cereal: made from grain (e.g. breakfast
                                                             showing place (e.g. he
                 cereal).                                    walked past me)
                 serial: adjective from the noun series –
                                                             passed: past tense of the
                 a succession of things one after the
                                                             verb ‘pass’ (e.g. I passed him
                 other.
                                                             in the road)
                 compliment: to make nice remarks
                                                             precede: go in front of or
                 about someone (verb) or the remark
                                                             before
                 that is made (noun).
                                                             proceed: go on
                 complement: related to the word
                 complete – to make something
                 complete or more complete (e.g. her
                 scarf complemented her outfit).


                                                                                            59
English – key stages 1 and 2


Statutory             Rules and guidance (non-statutory)           Example words
requirements                                                       (non-statutory)
Homophones            descent: the act of descending (going        principal: adjective – most
and other             down).                                       important (e.g. principal
words that are        dissent: to disagree/disagreement            ballerina) noun – important
often confused        (verb and noun).                             person (e.g. principal of a
(continued)           desert: as a noun – a barren place           college)
                      (stress on first syllable); as a verb – to   principle: basic truth or belief
                      abandon (stress on second syllable)          profit: money that is made in
                      dessert: (stress on second syllable) a       selling things
                      sweet course after the main course of        prophet: someone who
                      a meal.                                      foretells the future
                      draft: noun – a first attempt at writing     stationary: not moving
                      something; verb – to make the first          stationery: paper, envelopes
                      attempt; also, to draw in someone            etc.
                      (e.g. to draft in extra help)                steal: take something that
                      draught: a current of air.                   does not belong to you
                                                                   steel: metal
                                                                   wary: cautious
                                                                   weary: tired
                                                                   who’s: contraction of who is
                                                                   or who has
                                                                   whose: belonging to
                                                                   someone (e.g. Whose jacket
                                                                   is that?)




60
                                                                  English – key stages 1 and 2



Word list – years 5 and 6

accommodate            criticise (critic + ise)   individual           relevant
accompany              curiosity                  interfere            restaurant
according              definite                   interrupt            rhyme
achieve                desperate                  language             rhythm
aggressive             determined                 leisure              sacrifice
amateur                develop                    lightning            secretary
ancient                dictionary                 marvellous           shoulder
apparent               disastrous                 mischievous          signature
appreciate             embarrass                  muscle               sincere(ly)
attached               environment                necessary            soldier
available              equip (–ped, –ment)        neighbour            stomach
average                especially                 nuisance             sufficient
awkward                exaggerate                 occupy               suggest
bargain                excellent                  occur                symbol
bruise                 existence                  opportunity          system
category               explanation                parliament           temperature
cemetery               familiar                   persuade             thorough
committee              foreign                    physical             twelfth
communicate            forty                      prejudice            variety
community              frequently                 privilege            vegetable
competition            government                 profession           vehicle
conscience*            guarantee                  programme            yacht
conscious*             harass                     pronunciation
controversy            hindrance                  queue
convenience            identity                   recognise
correspond             immediate(ly)              recommend



Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Teachers should continue to emphasis to pupils the relationships between sounds and
letters, even when the relationships are unusual. Once root words are learnt in this way,
longer words can be spelt correctly if the rules and guidance for adding prefixes and
suffixes are also known. Many of the words in the list above can be used for practice in
adding suffixes.




                                                                                            61
English – key stages 1 and 2


Notes and guidance (non-statutory)
Understanding the history of words and relationships between them can also help with
spelling.
Examples:
    Conscience and conscious are related to science: conscience is simply science with
     the prefix con- added. These words come from the Latin word scio meaning I know.
    The word desperate, meaning ‘without hope’, is often pronounced in English
     as desp’rate, but the –sper- part comes from the Latin spero, meaning ‘I hope’, in
     which the e was clearly sounded.
    Familiar is related to family, so the /ə/ sound in the first syllable of familiar is spelt
     as a.




62
                                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2



    International Phonetic Alphabet (non-statutory)

The table below shows each symbol of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and
provides examples of the associated grapheme(s). 1 The table is not a comprehensive
alphabetic code chart; it is intended simply as guidance for teachers in understanding the
IPA symbols used in the spelling appendix (English Appendix 1). The pronunciations in the
table are, by convention, based on Received Pronunciation and could be significantly
different in other accents.

                     Consonants                                                  Vowels
    /b/       bad                                           /ɑː/      father, arm
    /d/       dog                                           /ɒ/       hot
    /ð/       this                                          /æ/       cat
    /dʒ/      gem, jug                                      /aɪ/      mind, fine, pie, high
    /f/       if, puff, photo                               /aʊ/      out, cow
    /ɡ/       gum                                           /ɛ/       hen, head
    /h/       how                                           /eɪ/      say, came, bait
    /j/       yes                                           /ɛə/      air
    /k/       cat, check, key, school                       /əʊ/      cold, boat, cone, blow
    /l/       leg, hill                                     /ɪ/       hit
    /m/       man                                           /ɪə/      beer
    /n/       man                                           /iː/      she, bead, see, scheme, chief
    /ŋ/       sing                                          /ɔː/      launch, raw, born
    /θ/       both                                          /ɔɪ/      coin, boy
    /p/       pet                                           /ʊ/       book
    /r/       red                                           /ʊə/      tour
    /s/       sit, miss, cell                               /uː/      room, you, blue, brute
    /ʃ/       she, chef                                     /ʌ/       cup
    /t/       tea                                           /ɜː/      fern, turn, girl
    /tʃ/      check                                         /ə/       farmer
    /v/       vet
    /w/       wet, when
    /z/       zip, hens, buzz
    /ʒ/       pleasure

1
     This chart is adapted slightly from the version provided on the DfE’s website to support the Year 1 phonics
     screening check.



                                                                                                             63
English – key stages 1 and 2



English Appendix 2: Vocabulary, grammar and
punctuation

The grammar of our first language is learnt naturally and implicitly through interactions with
other speakers and from reading. Explicit knowledge of grammar is, however, very
important, as it gives us more conscious control and choice in our language. Building this
knowledge is best achieved through a focus on grammar within the teaching of reading,
writing and speaking. Once pupils are familiar with a grammatical concept [for example
‘modal verb’], they should be encouraged to apply and explore this concept in the
grammar of their own speech and writing and to note where it is used by others. Young
pupils, in particular, use more complex language in speech than in writing, and teachers
should build on this, aiming for a smooth transition to sophisticated writing.

The table below focuses on Standard English and should be read in conjunction with the
programmes of study as it sets out the statutory requirements. The table shows when
concepts should be introduced first, not necessarily when they should be completely
understood. It is very important, therefore, that the content in earlier years be revisited in
subsequent years to consolidate knowledge and build on pupils’ understanding. Teachers
should also go beyond the content set out here if they feel it is appropriate.

The grammatical terms that pupils should learn are set out in the final column. They should
learn to recognise and use the terminology through discussion and practice. All terms in
bold should be understood with the meanings set out in the Glossary.




64
                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2


Vocabulary, grammar and punctuation – Years 1 to 6

Year 1: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word           Regular plural noun suffixes –s or –es [for example, dog, dogs; wish,
               wishes], including the effects of these suffixes on the meaning of the
               noun
               Suffixes that can be added to verbs where no change is needed in the
               spelling of root words (e.g. helping, helped, helper)
               How the prefix un– changes the meaning of verbs and adjectives
               [negation, for example, unkind, or undoing: untie the boat]
Sentence       How words can combine to make sentences
               Joining words and joining clauses using and
Text           Sequencing sentences to form short narratives
Punctuation    Separation of words with spaces
               Introduction to capital letters, full stops, question marks and exclamation
               marks to demarcate sentences
               Capital letters for names and for the personal pronoun I
Terminology    letter, capital letter
for pupils     word, singular, plural
               sentence
               punctuation, full stop, question mark, exclamation mark



Year 2: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word           Formation of nouns using suffixes such as –ness, –er and by
               compounding [for example, whiteboard, superman]
               Formation of adjectives using suffixes such as –ful, –less
               (A fuller list of suffixes can be found on page 46 in the year 2 spelling
               section in English Appendix 1)
               Use of the suffixes –er, –est in adjectives and the use of –ly in
               Standard English to turn adjectives into adverbs
Sentence       Subordination (using when, if, that, because) and co-ordination (using
               or, and, but)
               Expanded noun phrases for description and specification [for example,
               the blue butterfly, plain flour, the man in the moon]
               How the grammatical patterns in a sentence indicate its function as
               a statement, question, exclamation or command


                                                                                             65
English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 2: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Text              Correct choice and consistent use of present tense and past tense
                  throughout writing
                  Use of the progressive form of verbs in the present and past tense to
                  mark actions in progress [for example, she is drumming, he was
                  shouting]
Punctuation       Use of capital letters, full stops, question marks and exclamation marks
                  to demarcate sentences
                  Commas to separate items in a list
                  Apostrophes to mark where letters are missing in spelling and to mark
                  singular possession in nouns [for example, the girl’s name]
Terminology       noun, noun phrase
for pupils        statement, question, exclamation, command
                  compound, suffix
                  adjective, adverb, verb
                  tense (past, present)
                  apostrophe, comma



Year 3: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word              Formation of nouns using a range of prefixes [for example super–,
                  anti–, auto–]
                  Use of the forms a or an according to whether the next word begins
                  with a consonant or a vowel [for example, a rock, an open box]
                  Word families based on common words, showing how words are
                  related in form and meaning [for example, solve, solution, solver,
                  dissolve, insoluble]
Sentence          Expressing time, place and cause using conjunctions [for example,
                  when, before, after, while, so, because], adverbs [for example, then,
                  next, soon, therefore], or prepositions [for example, before, after,
                  during, in, because of]
Text              Introduction to paragraphs as a way to group related material
                  Headings and sub-headings to aid presentation
                  Use of the present perfect form of verbs instead of the simple past [for
                  example, He has gone out to play contrasted with He went out to play]
Punctuation       Introduction to inverted commas to punctuate direct speech




66
                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 3: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Terminology    preposition, conjunction
for pupils     word family, prefix
               clause, subordinate clause
               direct speech
               consonant, consonant letter vowel, vowel letter
               inverted commas (or ‘speech marks’)



Year 4: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word           The grammatical difference between plural and possessive –s
               Standard English forms for verb inflections instead of local spoken
               forms [for example, we were instead of we was, or I did instead of I
               done]
Sentence       Noun phrases expanded by the addition of modifying adjectives, nouns
               and preposition phrases (e.g. the teacher expanded to: the strict maths
               teacher with curly hair)
               Fronted adverbials [for example, Later that day, I heard the bad news.]
Text           Use of paragraphs to organise ideas around a theme
               Appropriate choice of pronoun or noun within and across sentences to
               aid cohesion and avoid repetition
Punctuation    Use of inverted commas and other punctuation to indicate direct
               speech [for example, a comma after the reporting clause; end
               punctuation within inverted commas: The conductor shouted, “Sit
               down!”]
               Apostrophes to mark plural possession [for example, the girl’s name,
               the girls’ names]
               Use of commas after fronted adverbials
Terminology    determiner
for pupils     pronoun, possessive pronoun
               adverbial




                                                                                          67
English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 5: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word              Converting nouns or adjectives into verbs using suffixes [for example,
                  –ate; –ise; –ify]
                  Verb prefixes [for example, dis–, de–, mis–, over– and re–]
Sentence          Relative clauses beginning with who, which, where, when, whose, that,
                  or an omitted relative pronoun
                  Indicating degrees of possibility using adverbs [for example, perhaps,
                  surely] or modal verbs [for example, might, should, will, must]
Text              Devices to build cohesion within a paragraph [for example, then, after
                  that, this, firstly]
                  Linking ideas across paragraphs using adverbials of time [for example,
                  later], place [for example, nearby] and number [for example, secondly]
                  or tense choices [for example, he had seen her before]
Punctuation       Brackets, dashes or commas to indicate parenthesis
                  Use of commas to clarify meaning or avoid ambiguity
Terminology       modal verb, relative pronoun
for pupils        relative clause
                  parenthesis, bracket, dash
                  cohesion, ambiguity



Year 6: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Word              The difference between vocabulary typical of informal speech and
                  vocabulary appropriate for formal speech and writing [for example, find
                  out – discover; ask for – request; go in – enter]
                  How words are related by meaning as synonyms and antonyms [for
                  example, big, large, little].
Sentence          Use of the passive to affect the presentation of information in a
                  sentence [for example, I broke the window in the greenhouse versus
                  The window in the greenhouse was broken (by me)].
                  The difference between structures typical of informal speech and
                  structures appropriate for formal speech and writing [for example, the
                  use of question tags: He’s your friend, isn’t he?, or the use of
                  subjunctive forms such as If I were or Were they to come in some very
                  formal writing and speech]




68
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Year 6: Detail of content to be introduced (statutory requirement)
Text           Linking ideas across paragraphs using a wider range of cohesive
               devices: repetition of a word or phrase, grammatical connections [for
               example, the use of adverbials such as on the other hand, in contrast,
               or as a consequence], and ellipsis
               Layout devices [for example, headings, sub-headings, columns, bullets,
               or tables, to structure text]
Punctuation    Use of the semi-colon, colon and dash to mark the boundary between
               independent clauses [for example, It’s raining; I’m fed up]
               Use of the colon to introduce a list and use of semi-colons within lists
               Punctuation of bullet points to list information
               How hyphens can be used to avoid ambiguity [for example, man eating
               shark versus man-eating shark, or recover versus re-cover]
Terminology    subject, object
for pupils     active, passive
               synonym, antonym
               ellipsis, hyphen, colon, semi-colon, bullet points




                                                                                             69
English – key stages 1 and 2



Glossary for the programmes of study for English
(non-statutory)

The following glossary includes all the technical grammatical terms used in the
programmes of study for English, as well as others that might be useful. It is intended as
an aid for teachers, not as the body of knowledge that should be learnt by pupils. Apart
from a few which are used only in schools (for example, root word), the terms below are
used with the meanings defined here in most modern books on English grammar. It is
recognised that there are different schools of thought on grammar, but the terms defined
here clarify those being used in the programmes of study. For further details, teachers
should consult the many books that are available.

Terms in definitions
As in any tightly structured area of knowledge, grammar, vocabulary and spelling involve a
network of technical concepts that help to define each other. Consequently, the definition
of one concept builds on other concepts that are equally technical. Concepts that are
defined elsewhere in the glossary are hyperlinked. For some concepts, the technical
definition may be slightly different from the meaning that some teachers may have learnt at
school or may have been using with their own pupils; in these cases, the more familiar
meaning is also discussed.

 Term                 Guidance                                  Example
 active voice         An active verb has its usual pattern      Active: The school arranged a visit.
                      of subject and object (in contrast with
                                                                Passive: A visit was arranged by
                      the passive).
                                                                the school.
 adjective            The surest way to identify adjectives     The pupils did some really good
                      is by the ways they can be used:          work. [adjective used before a
                       before a noun, to make the              noun, to modify it]
                          noun’s meaning more specific          Their work was good. [adjective
                          (i.e. to modify the noun), or         used after the verb be, as its
                       after the verb be, as its               complement]
                          complement.
                                                                Not adjectives:
                      Adjectives cannot be modified by          The lamp glowed. [verb]
                      other adjectives. This distinguishes      It was such a bright red! [noun]
                      them from nouns, which can be.            He spoke loudly. [adverb]
                      Adjectives are sometimes called           It was a French grammar book.
                      ‘describing words’ because they pick      [noun]
                      out single characteristics such as
                      size or colour. This is often true, but
                      it doesn’t help to distinguish
                      adjectives from other word classes,


70
                                                              English – key stages 1 and 2


Term         Guidance                                Example
             because verbs, nouns and adverbs
             can do the same thing.
adverb       The surest way to identify adverbs is   Usha soon started snoring loudly.
             by the ways they can be used: they      [adverbs modifying the verbs
             can modify a verb, an adjective,        started and snoring]
             another adverb or even a whole
                                                     That match was really exciting!
             clause.
                                                     [adverb modifying the adjective
             Adverbs are sometimes said to           exciting]
             describe manner or time. This is
                                                     We don’t get to play games very
             often true, but it doesn’t help to
                                                     often. [adverb modifying the other
             distinguish adverbs from other word
                                                     adverb, often]
             classes that can be used as
             adverbials, such as preposition         Fortunately, it didn’t rain. [adverb
             phrases, noun phrases and               modifying the whole clause ‘it didn’t
             subordinate clauses.                    rain’ by commenting on it]
                                                     Not adverbs:
                                                        Usha went up the stairs.
                                                         [preposition phrase used as
                                                         adverbial]
                                                        She finished her work this
                                                         evening. [noun phrase used as
                                                         adverbial]
                                                        She finished when the teacher
                                                         got cross. [subordinate clause
                                                         used as adverbial]
adverbial    An adverbial is a word or phrase that   The bus leaves in five minutes.
             is used, like an adverb, to modify a    [preposition phrase as adverbial:
             verb or clause. Of course, adverbs      modifies leaves]
             can be used as adverbials, but many
                                                     She promised to see him last night.
             other types of words and phrases
                                                     [noun phrase modifying either
             can be used this way, including
                                                     promised or see, according to the
             preposition phrases and subordinate
                                                     intended meaning]
             clauses.
                                                     She worked until she had finished.
                                                     [subordinate clause as adverbial]
antonym      Two words are antonyms if their         hot – cold
             meanings are opposites.
                                                     light – dark
                                                     light – heavy
apostrophe   Apostrophes have two completely         I’m going out and I won’t be long.
             different uses:                         [showing missing letters]
                showing the place of missing        Hannah’s mother went to town in
                 letters (e.g. I’m for I am)         Justin’s car. [marking possessives]


                                                                                          71
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                  Example
                         marking possessives
                          (e.g. Hannah’s mother).
 article              The articles the (definite) and a or an   The dog found a bone in an old
                      (indefinite) are the most common          box.
                      type of determiner.
 auxiliary verb       The auxiliary verbs are: be, have, do     They are winning the match. [be
                      and the modal verbs. They can be          used in the progressive]
                      used to make questions and
                                                                Have you finished your picture?
                      negative statements. In addition:
                                                                [have used to make a question,
                         be is used in the progressive and     and the perfect]
                          passive
                                                                No, I don’t know him. [do used to
                         have is used in the perfect
                                                                make a negative; no other auxiliary
                         do is used to form questions and      is present]
                          negative statements if no other
                                                                Will you come with me or not?
                          auxiliary verb is present
                                                                [modal verb will used to make a
                                                                question about the other person’s
                                                                willingness]
 clause               A clause is a special type of phrase      It was raining. [single-clause
                      whose head is a verb. Clauses can         sentence]
                      sometimes be complete sentences.
                                                                It was raining but we were indoors.
                      Clauses may be main or
                                                                [two finite clauses]
                      subordinate.
                                                                If you are coming to the party,
                      Traditionally, a clause had to have a
                                                                please let us know. [finite
                      finite verb, but most modern
                                                                subordinate clause inside a finite
                      grammarians also recognise non-
                                                                main clause]
                      finite clauses.
                                                                Usha went upstairs to play on her
                                                                computer. [non-finite clause]
 cohesion             A text has cohesion if it is clear how    A visit has been arranged for Year
                      the meanings of its parts fit together.   6, to the Mountain Peaks Field
                      Cohesive devices can help to do           Study Centre, leaving school at
                      this.                                     9.30am. This is an overnight
                                                                visit. The centre has beautiful
                      In the example, there are repeated
                                                                grounds and a nature trail. During
                      references to the same thing (shown
                                                                the afternoon, the children will
                      by the different style pairings), and
                                                                follow the trail.
                      the logical relations, such as time
                      and cause, between different parts
                      are clear.
 cohesive device      Cohesive devices are words used to        Julia’s dad bought her a football.
                      show how the different parts of a text    The football was expensive!
                      fit together. In other words, they        [determiner; refers us back to a
                      create cohesion.                          particular football]


72
                                                              English – key stages 1 and 2


Term          Guidance                               Example
              Some examples of cohesive devices      Joe was given a bike for
              are:                                   Christmas. He liked it very much.
                 determiners and pronouns, which    [the pronouns refer back to Joe
                  can refer back to earlier words    and the bike]
                 conjunctions and adverbs, which    We’ll be going shopping before we
                  can make relations between         go to the park. [conjunction; makes
                  words clear                        a relationship of time clear]
                 ellipsis of expected words.        I’m afraid we’re going to have to
                                                     wait for the next train. Meanwhile,
                                                     we could have a cup of tea.
                                                     [adverb; refers back to the time of
                                                     waiting]
                                                     Where are you going? [ ] To
                                                     school! [ellipsis of the expected
                                                     words I’m going; links the answer
                                                     back to the question]
complement    A verb’s subject complement adds       She is our teacher. [adds more
              more information about its subject,    information about the subject, she]
              and its object complement does the
                                                     They seem very competent. [adds
              same for its object.
                                                     more information about the subject,
              Unlike the verb’s object, its          they]
              complement may be an adjective.
                                                     Learning makes me happy. [adds
              The verb be normally has a
                                                     more information about the object,
              complement.
                                                     me]
compound,     A compound word contains at least      blackbird, blow-dry, bookshop, ice-
compounding   two root words in its morphology;      cream, English teacher, inkjet, one-
              e.g. whiteboard, superman.             eyed, bone-dry, baby-sit,
              Compounding is very important in       daydream, outgrow
              English.
conjunction   A conjunction links two words or       James bought a bat and ball. [links
              phrases together.                      the words bat and ball as an equal
                                                     pair]
              There are two main types of
              conjunctions:                          Kylie is young but she can kick the
                 co-ordinating conjunctions (e.g.   ball hard. [links two clauses as an
                  and) link two words or phrases     equal pair]
                  together as an equal pair          Everyone watches when Kyle does
                 subordinating conjunctions (e.g.   back-flips. [introduces a
                  when) introduce a subordinate      subordinate clause]
                  clause.
                                                     Joe can’t practise kicking because
                                                     he’s injured. [introduces a
                                                     subordinate clause]



                                                                                           73
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                 Example
 consonant            A sound which is produced when the       /p/ [flow of air stopped by the lips,
                      speaker closes off or obstructs the      then released]
                      flow of air through the vocal tract,
                                                               /t/ [flow of air stopped by the
                      usually using lips, tongue or teeth.
                                                               tongue touching the roof of the
                      Most of the letters of the alphabet      mouth, then released]
                      represent consonants. Only the
                                                               /f/ [flow of air obstructed by the
                      letters a, e, i, o, u and y can
                                                               bottom lip touching the top teeth]
                      represent vowel sounds.
                                                               /s/ [flow of air obstructed by the tip
                                                               of the tongue touching the gum
                                                               line]
 continuous           See progressive
 co-ordinate,         Words or phrases are co-ordinated if     Susan and Amra met in a café.
 co-ordination        they are linked as an equal pair by a    [links the words Susan and Amra
                      co-ordinating conjunction (i.e. and,     as an equal pair]
                      but, or).
                                                               They talked and drank tea for an
                      In the examples on the right, the co-    hour. [links two clauses as an
                      ordinated elements are shown in          equal pair]
                      bold, and the conjunction is
                                                               Susan got a bus but Amra
                      underlined.
                                                               walked. [links two clauses as an
                      The difference between                   equal pair]
                      co-ordination and subordination is
                                                               Not co-ordination: They ate before
                      that, in subordination, the two linked
                                                               they met. [before introduces a
                      elements are not equal.
                                                               subordinate clause]
 determiner           A determiner specifies a noun as         the home team [article, specifies
                      known or unknown, and it goes            the team as known]
                      before any modifiers (e.g. adjectives
                                                               a good team [article, specifies the
                      or other nouns).
                                                               team as unknown]
                      Some examples of determiners are:
                                                               that pupil [demonstrative, known]
                         articles (the, a or an)
                                                               Julia’s parents [possessive, known]
                         demonstratives (e.g. this, those)
                                                               some big boys [quantifier,
                         possessives (e.g. my, your)
                                                               unknown]
                         quantifiers (e.g. some, every).
                                                               Contrast: home the team, big some
                                                               boys [both incorrect, because the
                                                               determiner should come before
                                                               other modifiers]
 digraph              A type of grapheme where two             The digraph ea in each is
                      letters represent one phoneme.           pronounced /i:/.
                      Sometimes, these two letters are not     The digraph sh in shed is
                      next to one another; this is called a    pronounced /ʃ/.


74
                                                                        English – key stages 1 and 2


Term                Guidance                                   Example
                    split digraph.                             The split digraph i–e in line is
                                                               pronounced /aɪ/.
ellipsis            Ellipsis is the omission of a word or      Frankie waved to Ivana and she
                    phrase which is expected and               watched her drive away.
                    predictable.
                                                               She did it because she wanted to
                                                               do it.
etymology           A word’s etymology is its history: its     The word school was borrowed
                    origins in earlier forms of English or     from a Greek word ó÷ïëÞ (skholé)
                    other languages, and how its form          meaning ‘leisure’.
                    and meaning have changed. Many
                                                               The word verb comes from Latin
                    words in English have come from
                                                               verbum, meaning ‘word’.
                    Greek, Latin or French.
                                                               The word mutton comes from
                                                               French mouton, meaning ‘sheep’.
finite verb         Every sentence typically has at least      Lizzie does the dishes every day.
                    one verb which is either past or           [present tense]
                    present tense. Such verbs are called
                                                               Even Hana did the dishes
                    ‘finite’. The imperative verb in a
                                                               yesterday. [past tense]
                    command is also finite.
                                                               Do the dishes, Naser! [imperative]
                    Verbs that are not finite, such as
                    participles or infinitives, cannot stand   Not finite verbs:
                    on their own: they are linked to              I have done them. [combined
                    another verb in the sentence.                  with the finite verb have]
                                                                  I will do them. [combined with
                                                                   the finite verb will]
                                                                  I want to do them! [combined
                                                                   with the finite verb want]
fronting, fronted   A word or phrase that normally             Before we begin, make sure you’ve
                    comes after the verb may be moved          got a pencil.
                    before the verb: when this happens,
                                                               [Without fronting: Make sure you’ve
                    we say it has been ‘fronted’. For
                                                               got a pencil before we begin.]
                    example, a fronted adverbial is an
                    adverbial which has been moved             The day after tomorrow, I’m visiting
                    before the verb.                           my granddad.

                    When writing fronted phrases, we           [Without fronting: I’m visiting my
                    often follow them with a comma.            granddad the day after tomorrow.]

future              Reference to future time can be            He will leave tomorrow. [present-
                    marked in a number of different ways       tense will followed by infinitive
                    in English. All these ways involve the     leave]
                    use of a present-tense verb.
                                                               He may leave tomorrow. [present-
                    See also tense.                            tense may followed by infinitive
                                                               leave]
                    Unlike many other languages (such


                                                                                                    75
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                 Example
                      as French, Spanish or Italian),          He leaves tomorrow. [present-
                      English has no distinct ‘future tense’   tense leaves]
                      form of the verb comparable with its
                                                               He is going to leave tomorrow.
                      present and past tenses.
                                                               [present tense is followed by going
                                                               to plus the infinitive leave]
 GPC                  See grapheme-phoneme
                      correspondences.
 grapheme             A letter, or combination of letters,     The grapheme t in the words ten,
                      that corresponds to a single             bet and ate corresponds to the
                      phoneme within a word.                   phoneme /t/.
                                                               The grapheme ph in the word
                                                               dolphin corresponds to the
                                                               phoneme /f/.
 grapheme-            The links between letters, or            The grapheme s corresponds to
 phoneme              combinations of letters (graphemes)      the phoneme /s/ in the word see,
 correspondences      and the speech sounds (phonemes)         but…
                      that they represent.
                                                               …it corresponds to the phoneme
                      In the English writing system,           /z/ in the word easy.
                      graphemes may correspond to
                      different phonemes in different
                      words.
 head                 See phrase.
 homonym              Two different words are homonyms if      Has he left yet? Yes – he went
                      they both look exactly the same          through the door on the left.
                      when written, and sound exactly the
                                                               The noise a dog makes is called a
                      same when pronounced.
                                                               bark. Trees have bark.
 homophone            Two different words are                  hear, here
                      homophones if they sound exactly
                                                               some, sum
                      the same when pronounced.
 infinitive           A verb’s infinitive is the basic form    I want to walk.
                      used as the head-word in a
                                                               I will be quiet.
                      dictionary (e.g. walk, be).
                      Infinitives are often used:
                         after to
                         after modal verbs.
 inflection           When we add -ed to walk, or change       dogs is an inflection of dog.
                      mouse to mice, this change of            went is an inflection of go.
                      morphology produces an inflection
                                                               better is an inflection of good.
                      (‘bending’) of the basic word which
                      has special grammar (e.g. past tense


76
                                                                      English – key stages 1 and 2


Term                Guidance                                 Example
                    or plural). In contrast, adding -er to
                    walk produces a completely different
                    word, walker, which is part of the
                    same word family. Inflection is
                    sometimes thought of as merely a
                    change of ending, but, in fact, some
                    words change completely when
                    inflected.
intransitive verb   A verb which does not need an            We all laughed.
                    object in a sentence to complete its     We would like to stay longer, but
                    meaning is described as intransitive.    we must leave.
                    See ‘transitive verb’.
main clause         A sentence contains at least one         It was raining but the sun was
                    clause which is not a subordinate        shining. [two main clauses]
                    clause; such a clause is a main
                                                             The man who wrote it told me that
                    clause. A main clause may contain
                                                             it was true. [one main clause
                    any number of subordinate clauses.
                                                             containing two subordinate
                                                             clauses.]
                                                             She said, “It rained all day.” [one
                                                             main clause containing another.]
modal verb          Modal verbs are used to change the       I can do this maths work by myself.
                    meaning of other verbs. They can
                                                             This ride may be too scary for you!
                    express meanings such as certainty,
                    ability, or obligation. The main modal   You should help your little brother.
                    verbs are will, would, can, could,       Is it going to rain? Yes, it might.
                    may, might, shall, should, must and
                                                             Canning swim is important. [not
                    ought.
                                                             possible because can must be
                    A modal verb only has finite forms       finite; contrast: Being able to swim
                    and has no suffixes (e.g. I sing – he    is important, where being is not a
                    sings, but not I must – he musts).       modal verb]
modify, modifier    One word or phrase modifies              In the phrase primary-school
                    another by making its meaning more       teacher:
                    specific.                                   teacher is modified by primary-
                    Because the two words make a                 school (to mean a specific kind
                    phrase, the ‘modifier’ is normally           of teacher)
                    close to the modified word.                 school is modified by primary
                                                                 (to mean a specific kind of
                                                                 school).
morphology          A word’s morphology is its internal      dogs has the morphological make-
                    make-up in terms of root words and       up: dog + s.
                    suffixes or prefixes, as well as other
                                                             unhelpfulness has the
                    kinds of change such as the change


                                                                                                    77
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                   Example
                      of mouse to mice.                          morphological make-up:
                      Morphology may be used to produce              unhelpful + ness
                      different inflections of the same word        where unhelpful = un + helpful
                      (e.g. boy – boys), or entirely new            and helpful = help + ful
                      words (e.g. boy – boyish) belonging
                      to the same word family.
                      A word that contains two or more
                      root words is a compound (e.g.
                      news+paper, ice+cream).
 noun                 The surest way to identify nouns is        Our dog bit the burglar on his
                      by the ways they can be used after         behind!
                      determiners such as the: for
                                                                 My big brother did an amazing
                      example, most nouns will fit into the
                                                                 jump on his skateboard.
                      frame “The __ matters/matter.”
                                                                 Actions speak louder than words.
                      Nouns are sometimes called ‘naming
                      words’ because they name people,           Not nouns:
                      places and ‘things’; this is often true,      He’s behind you! [this names a
                      but it doesn’t help to distinguish             place, but is a preposition, not
                      nouns from other word classes. For             a noun]
                      example, prepositions can name                She can jump so high! [this
                      places and verbs can name ‘things’             names an action, but is a verb,
                      such as actions.                               not a noun]
                      Nouns may be classified as                 common, countable: a book,
                      common (e.g. boy, day) or proper           books, two chocolates, one day,
                      (e.g. Ivan, Wednesday), and also as        fewer ideas
                      countable (e.g. thing, boy) or non-
                                                                 common, non-countable: money,
                      countable (e.g. stuff, money). These
                                                                 some chocolate, less imagination
                      classes can be recognised by the
                      determiners they combine with.             proper, countable: Marilyn,
                                                                 London, Wednesday
 noun phrase          A noun phrase is a phrase with a           Adult foxes can jump. [adult
                      noun as its head, e.g. some foxes,         modifies foxes, so adult belongs to
                      foxes with bushy tails. Some               the noun phrase]
                      grammarians recognise one-word
                                                                 Almost all healthy adult foxes in
                      phrases, so that foxes are
                                                                 this area can jump. [all the other
                      multiplying would contain the noun
                                                                 words help to modify foxes, so they
                      foxes acting as the head of the noun
                                                                 all belong to the noun phrase]
                      phrase foxes.
 object               An object is normally a noun,              Year 2 designed puppets. [noun
                      pronoun or noun phrase that comes          acting as object]
                      straight after the verb, and shows
                                                                 I like that. [pronoun acting as
                      what the verb is acting upon.
                                                                 object]
                      Objects can be turned into the


78
                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2


Term         Guidance                                   Example
             subject of a passive verb, and             Some people suggested a pretty
             cannot be adjectives (contrast with        display. [noun phrase acting as
             complements).                              object]
                                                        Contrast:
                                                           A display was suggested.
                                                            [object of active verb becomes
                                                            the subject of the passive verb]
                                                           Year 2 designed pretty.
                                                            [incorrect, because adjectives
                                                            cannot be objects]
participle   Verbs in English have two                  He is walking to school. [present
             participles, called ‘present participle’   participle in a progressive]
             (e.g. walking, taking) and ‘past
                                                        He has taken the bus to school.
             participle’ (e.g. walked, taken).
                                                        [past participle in a perfect]
             Unfortunately, these terms can be
                                                        The photo was taken in the rain.
             confusing to learners, because:
                                                        [past participle in a passive]
                they don’t necessarily have
                 anything to do with present or
                 past time
                although past participles are
                 used as perfects (e.g. has eaten)
                 they are also used as passives
                 (e.g. was eaten).
passive      The sentence It was eaten by our           A visit was arranged by the school.
             dog is the passive of Our dog ate it.
                                                        Our cat got run over by a bus.
             A passive is recognisable from:
                                                        Active versions:
                the past participle form eaten
                                                           The school arranged a visit.
                the normal object (it) turned into
                 the subject                               A bus ran over our cat.
                the normal subject (our dog)           Not passive:
                 turned into an optional                   He received a warning. [past
                 preposition phrase with by as its          tense, active received]
                 head
                                                           We had an accident. [past
                the verb be(was), or some other            tense, active had]
                 verb such as get.
             Contrast active.
             A verb is not ‘passive’ just because it
             has a passive meaning: it must be
             the passive version of an active verb.
past tense   Verbs in the past tense are                Tom and Chris showed me their
             commonly used to:                          new TV. [names an event in the



                                                                                             79
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                    Example
                         talk about the past                     past]
                         talk about imagined situations          Antonio went on holiday to Brazil.
                         make a request sound more               [names an event in the past;
                          polite.                                 irregular past of go]
                      Most verbs take a suffix –ed, to form       I wish I had a puppy. [names an
                      their past tense, but many                  imagined situation, not a situation
                      commonly-used verbs are irregular.          in the past]
                      See also tense.                             I was hoping you’d help tomorrow.
                                                                  [makes an implied request sound
                                                                  more polite]
 perfect              The perfect form of a verb generally        She has downloaded some songs.
                      calls attention to the consequences         [present perfect; now she has
                      of a prior event; for example, he has       some songs]
                      gone to lunch implies that he is still
                                                                  I had eaten lunch when you came.
                      away, in contrast with he went to
                                                                  [past perfect; I wasn’t hungry when
                      lunch. ‘Had gone to lunch’ takes a
                                                                  you came]
                      past time point (i.e. when we arrived)
                      as its reference point and is another
                      way of establishing time relations in
                      a text. The perfect tense is formed
                      by:
                         turning the verb into its past
                          participle inflection
                         adding a form of the verb have
                          before it.
                      It can also be combined with the
                      progressive (e.g. he has been
                      going).
 phoneme              A phoneme is the smallest unit of           The word cat has three letters and
                      sound that signals a distinct,              three phonemes: /kæt/
                      contrasting meaning. For example:
                                                                  The word catch has five letters and
                         /t/ contrasts with /k/ to signal the
                                                                  three phonemes: /kaʧ/
                          difference between tap and cap
                         /t/ contrasts with /l/ to signal the    The word caught has six letters
                          difference between bought and           and three phonemes: /kɔ:t/
                          ball.
                      It is this contrast in meaning that tells
                      us there are two distinct phonemes
                      at work.
                      There are around 44 phonemes in
                      English; the exact number depends
                      on regional accents. A single


80
                                                                 English – key stages 1 and 2


Term          Guidance                                  Example
              phoneme may be represented in
              writing by one, two, three or four
              letters constituting a single
              grapheme.
phrase        A phrase is a group of words that are     She waved to her mother. [a noun
              grammatically connected so that           phrase, with the noun mother as its
              they stay together, and that expand       head]
              a single word, called the ‘head’. The
                                                        She waved to her mother. [a
              phrase is a noun phrase if its head is
                                                        preposition phrase, with the
              a noun, a preposition phrase if its
                                                        preposition to as its head]
              head is a preposition, and so on; but
              if the head is a verb, the phrase is      She waved to her mother. [a
              called a clause. Phrases can be           clause, with the verb waved as its
              made up of other phrases.                 head]

plural        A plural noun normally has a suffix –     dogs [more than one dog]; boxes
              s or –es and means ‘more than one’.       [more than one box]
              There are a few nouns with different      mice [more than one mouse]
              morphology in the plural (e.g. mice,
              formulae).
possessive    A possessive can be:                      Tariq’s book [Tariq has the book]
                 a noun followed by an                 The boys’ arrival [the boys arrive]
                  apostrophe, with or without s
                                                        His obituary [the obituary is about
                 a possessive pronoun.
                                                        him]
              The relation expressed by a
                                                        That essay is mine. [I wrote the
              possessive goes well beyond
                                                        essay]
              ordinary ideas of ‘possession’.
              A possessive may act as a
              determiner.
prefix        A prefix is added at the beginning of     overtake, disappear
              a word in order to turn it into another
              word.
              Contrast suffix.
preposition   A preposition links a following noun,     Tom waved goodbye to Christy.
              pronoun or noun phrase to some            She’ll be back from Australia in two
              other word in the sentence.               weeks.
              Prepositions often describe locations
                                                        I haven’t seen my dog since this
              or directions, but can describe other
                                                        morning.
              things, such as relations of time.
                                                        Contrast: I’m going, since no-one
              Words like before or since can act
                                                        wants me here! [conjunction: links
              either as prepositions or as
                                                        two clauses]
              conjunctions.



                                                                                              81
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                  Example
 preposition          A preposition phrase has a                He was in bed.
 phrase               preposition as its head followed by a
                                                                I met them after the party.
                      noun, pronoun or noun phrase.
 present tense        Verbs in the present tense are            Jamal goes to the pool every day.
                      commonly used to:                         [describes a habit that exists now]
                         talk about the present                He can swim. [describes a state
                         talk about the future.                that is true now]
                      They may take a suffix –s                 The bus arrives at three.
                      (depending on the subject).               [scheduled now]
                      See also tense.                           My friends are coming to play.
                                                                [describes a plan in progress now]
 progressive          The progressive (also known as the        Michael is singing in the store
                      ‘continuous’) form of a verb generally    room. [present progressive]
                      describes events in progress. It is
                                                                Amanda was making a patchwork
                      formed by combining the verb’s
                                                                quilt. [past progressive]
                      present participle (e.g. singing) with
                      a form of the verb be (e.g. he was        Usha had been practising for an
                      singing). The progressive can also        hour when I called. [past perfect
                      be combined with the perfect (e.g. he     progressive]
                      has been singing).
 pronoun              Pronouns are normally used like           Amanda waved to Michael.
                      nouns, except that:
                                                                She waved to him.
                         they are grammatically more
                                                                John’s mother is over there. His
                          specialised
                                                                mother is over there.
                         it is harder to modify them
                                                                The visit will be an overnight visit.
                      In the examples, each sentence is
                                                                This will be an overnight visit.
                      written twice: once with nouns, and
                      once with pronouns (underlined).          Simon is the person: Simon broke
                      Where the same thing is being talked      it. He is the one who broke it.
                      about, the words are shown in bold.
 punctuation          Punctuation includes any                  “I’m going out, Usha, and I won’t
                      conventional features of writing other    be long,” Mum said.
                      than spelling and general layout: the
                      standard punctuation marks . , ; : ? !
                      - – ( ) “ ” ‘ ’ , and also word-spaces,
                      capital letters, apostrophes,
                      paragraph breaks and bullet points.
                      One important role of punctuation is
                      to indicate sentence boundaries.
 Received             Received Pronunciation (often
 Pronunciation        abbreviated to RP) is an accent
                      which is used only by a small


82
                                                                     English – key stages 1 and 2


Term              Guidance                                  Example
                  minority of English speakers in
                  England. It is not associated with any
                  one region. Because of its regional
                  neutrality, it is the accent which is
                  generally shown in dictionaries in the
                  UK (but not, of course, in the USA).
                  RP has no special status in the
                  national curriculum.
register          Classroom lessons, football               I regret to inform you that Mr
                  commentaries and novels use               Joseph Smith has passed away.
                  different registers of the same           [formal letter]
                  language, recognised by differences
                                                            Have you heard that Joe has died?
                  of vocabulary and grammar.
                                                            [casual speech]
                  Registers are ‘varieties’ of a
                  language which are each tied to a         Joe falls down and dies, centre
                  range of uses, in contrast with           stage. [stage direction]
                  dialects, which are tied to groups of
                  users.
relative clause   A relative clause is a special type of    That’s the boy who lives near
                  subordinate clause that modifies a        school. [who refers back to boy]
                  noun. It often does this by using a
                                                            The prize that I won was a book.
                  relative pronoun such as who or that
                                                            [that refers back to prize]
                  to refer back to that noun, though the
                  relative pronoun that is often omitted.   The prize I won was a book. [the
                                                            pronoun that is omitted]
                  A relative clause may also be
                  attached to a clause. In that case,       Tom broke the game, which
                  the pronoun refers back to the whole      annoyed Ali. [which refers back to
                  clause, rather than referring back to     the whole clause]
                  a noun.
                  In the examples, the relative clauses
                  are underlined, and both the
                  pronouns and the words they refer
                  back to are in bold
root word         Morphology breaks words down into         played [the root word is play]
                  root words, which can stand alone,
                                                            unfair [the root word is fair]
                  and suffixes or prefixes which can’t.
                  For example, help is the root word        football [the root words are foot
                  for other words in its word family        and ball]
                  such as helpful and helpless, and
                  also for its inflections such as
                  helping. Compound words (e.g. help-
                  desk) contain two or more root
                  words. When looking in a dictionary,
                  we sometimes have to look for the


                                                                                                 83
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                    Example
                      root word (or words) of the word we
                      are interested in.
 schwa                The name of a vowel sound that is           /əlɒŋ/ [along]
                      found only in unstressed positions in
                                                                  /bʌtə/ [butter]
                      English. It is the most common vowel
                      sound in English.                           /dɒktə/ [doctor]

                      It is written as /ə/ in the International
                      Phonetic Alphabet. In the English
                      writing system, it can be written in
                      many different ways.
 sentence             A sentence is a group of words              John went to his friend’s house. He
                      which are grammatically connected           stayed there till tea-time.
                      to each other but not to any words
                                                                  John went to his friend’s house, he
                      outside the sentence.
                                                                  stayed there till tea-time. [This is a
                      The form of a sentence’s main               ‘comma splice’, a common error in
                      clause shows whether it is being            which a comma is used where
                      used as a statement, a question, a          either a full stop or a semi-colon is
                      command or an exclamation.                  needed to indicate the lack of any
                                                                  grammatical connection between
                      A sentence may consist of a single
                                                                  the two clauses.]
                      clause or it may contain several
                      clauses held together by                    You are my friend. [statement]
                      subordination or co-ordination.             Are you my friend? [question]
                      Classifying sentences as ‘simple’,
                                                                  Be my friend! [command]
                      ‘complex’ or ‘compound’ can be
                                                                  What a good friend you are!
                      confusing, because a ‘simple’
                                                                  [exclamation]
                      sentence may be complicated, and a
                      ‘complex’ one may be                        Ali went home on his bike to his
                      straightforward. The terms ‘single-         goldfish and his current library
                      clause sentence’ and ‘multi-clause          book about pets. [single-clause
                      sentence’ may be more helpful.              sentence]
                                                                  She went shopping but took back
                                                                  everything she had bought
                                                                  because she didn’t like any of it.
                                                                  [multi-clause sentence]
 split digraph        See digraph.
 Standard English     Standard English can be recognised          I did it because they were not
                      by the use of a very small range of         willing to undertake any more work
                      forms such as those books, I did it         on those houses. [formal Standard
                      and I wasn’t doing anything (rather         English]
                      than their non-Standard equivalents);
                                                                  I did it cos they wouldn’t do any
                      it is not limited to any particular
                                                                  more work on those houses.
                      accent. It is the variety of English
                                                                  [casual Standard English]
                      which is used, with only minor


84
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Term            Guidance                                   Example
                variation, as a major world language.      I done it cos they wouldn’t do no
                Some people use Standard English           more work on them houses.
                all the time, in all situations from the   [casual non-Standard English]
                most casual to the most formal, so it
                covers most registers. The aim of the
                national curriculum is that everyone
                should be able to use Standard
                English as needed in writing and in
                relatively formal speaking.
stress          A syllable is stressed if it is            about
                pronounced more forcefully than the
                                                           visit
                syllables next to it. The other
                syllables are unstressed.
subject         The subject of a verb is normally the      Rula’s mother went out.
                noun, noun phrase or pronoun that
                names the ‘do-er’ or ‘be-er’. The          That is uncertain.
                subject’s normal position is:              The children will study the animals.
                   just before the verb in a
                                                           Will the children study the animals?
                    statement
                   just after the auxiliary verb, in a
                    question.
                Unlike the verb’s object and
                complement, the subject can
                determine the form of the verb (e.g. I
                am, you are).
subjunctive     In some languages, the inflections of      The school requires that all pupils
                a verb include a large range of            be honest.
                special forms which are used
                                                           The school rules demand that
                typically in subordinate clauses, and
                                                           pupils not enter the gym at
                are called ‘subjunctives’. English has
                                                           lunchtime.
                very few such forms and those it has
                tend to be used in rather formal           If Zoë were the class president,
                styles.                                    things would be much better.

subordinate,    A subordinate word or phrase tells         big dogs [big is subordinate to
subordination   us more about the meaning of the           dogs]
                word it is subordinate to.
                                                           Big dogs need long walks.
                Subordination can be thought of as
                                                           [big dogs and long walks are
                an unequal relationship between a
                                                           subordinate to need]
                subordinate word and a main word.
                For example:                               We can watch TV when we’ve
                                                           finished. [when we’ve finished is
                   an adjective is subordinate to the
                                                           subordinate to watch]
                    noun it modifies
                   subjects and objects are


                                                                                                 85
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                Example
                          subordinate to their verbs.
                      Subordination is much more
                      common than the equal relationship
                      of co-ordination.
                      See also subordinate clause.

 subordinate          A clause which is subordinate to        That’s the street where Ben lives.
 clause               some other part of the same             [relative clause; modifies street]
                      sentence is a subordinate clause; for
                                                              He watched her as she
                      example, in The apple that I ate was
                                                              disappeared. [adverbial; modifies
                      sour, the clause that I ate is
                                                              watched]
                      subordinate to apple (which it
                      modifies). Subordinate clauses          What you said was very nice. [acts
                      contrast with co-ordinate clauses as    as subject of was]
                      in It was sour but looked very tasty.   She noticed an hour had passed.
                      (Contrast: main clause)                 [acts as object of noticed]
                      However, clauses that are directly      Not subordinate: He shouted,
                      quoted as direct speech are not         “Look out!”
                      subordinate clauses.
 suffix               A suffix is an ‘ending’, used at the    call – called
                      end of one word to turn it into
                                                              teach – teacher [turns a verb into a
                      another word. Unlike root words,
                                                              noun]
                      suffixes cannot stand on their own as
                      a complete word.                        terror – terrorise [turns a noun into
                                                              a verb]
                      Contrast prefix.
                                                              green – greenish [leaves word
                                                              class unchanged]
 syllable             A syllable sounds like a beat in a      Cat has one syllable.
                      word. Syllables consist of at least
                                                              Fairy has two syllables.
                      one vowel, and possibly one or more
                      consonants.                             Hippopotamus has five syllables.

 synonym              Two words are synonyms if they          talk – speak
                      have the same meaning, or similar
                                                              old – elderly
                      meanings. Contrast antonym.
 tense                In English, tense is the choice         He studies. [present tense –
                      between present and past verbs,         present time]
                      which is special because it is
                                                              He studied yesterday. [past tense –
                      signalled by inflections and normally
                                                              past time]
                      indicates differences of time. In
                      contrast, languages like French,        He studies tomorrow, or else!
                      Spanish and Italian, have three or      [present tense – future time]
                      more distinct tense forms, including    He may study tomorrow. [present



86
                                                                    English – key stages 1 and 2


Term              Guidance                                 Example
                  a future tense. (See also: future.)      tense + infinitive – future time]
                  The simple tenses (present and           He plans to study tomorrow.
                  past) may be combined in English         [present tense + infinitive – future
                  with the perfect and progressive.        time]
                                                           If he studied tomorrow, he’d see
                                                           the difference! [past tense –
                                                           imagined future]
                                                           Contrast three distinct tense forms
                                                           in Spanish:
                                                              Estudia. [present tense]
                                                              Estudió. [past tense]
                                                              Estudiará. [future tense]
transitive verb   A transitive verb takes at least one     He loves Juliet.
                  object in a sentence to complete its     She understands English grammar.
                  meaning, in contrast to an
                  intransitive verb, which does not.
trigraph          A type of grapheme where three           High, pure, patch, hedge
                  letters represent one phoneme.
unstressed        See stressed.
verb              The surest way to identify verbs is by   He lives in Birmingham. [present
                  the ways they can be used: they can      tense]
                  usually have a tense, either present
                                                           The teacher wrote a song for the
                  or past (see also future).
                                                           class. [past tense]
                  Verbs are sometimes called ‘doing
                                                           He likes chocolate. [present tense;
                  words’ because many verbs name
                                                           not an action]
                  an action that someone does; while
                  this can be a way of recognising         He knew my father. [past tense;
                  verbs, it doesn’t distinguish verbs      not an action]
                  from nouns (which can also name          Not verbs:
                  actions). Moreover many verbs
                  name states or feelings rather than       The walk to Halina’s house will
                  actions.                                    take an hour. [noun]
                  Verbs can be classified in various          All that surfing makes
                  ways: for example, as auxiliary, or          Morwenna so sleepy! [noun]
                  modal; as transitive or intransitive;
                  and as states or events.
vowel             A vowel is a speech sound which is
                  produced without any closure or
                  obstruction of the vocal tract.
                  Vowels can form syllables by
                  themselves, or they may combine
                  with consonants.
                  In the English writing system, the
                  letters a, e, i, o, u and y can
                  represent vowels.


                                                                                                  87
English – key stages 1 and 2


 Term                 Guidance                                 Example
 word                 A word is a unit of grammar: it can      headteacher or head teacher [can
                      be selected and moved around             be written with or without a space]
                      relatively independently, but cannot
                                                               I’m going out.
                      easily be split. In punctuation, words
                      are normally separated by word           9.30 am
                      spaces.
                      Sometimes, a sequence that
                      appears grammatically to be two
                      words is collapsed into a single
                      written word, indicated with a hyphen
                      or apostrophe (e.g. well-built, he’s).
 word class           Every word belongs to a word class
                      which summarises the ways in which
                      it can be used in grammar. The
                      major word classes for English are:
                      noun, verb, adjective, adverb,
                      preposition, determiner, pronoun,
                      conjunction. Word classes are
                      sometimes called ‘parts of speech’.
 word family          The words in a word family are           teach – teacher
                      normally related to each other by a
                                                               extend – extent – extensive
                      combination of morphology,
                      grammar and meaning.                     grammar – grammatical –
                                                               grammarian




© Crown copyright 2013

You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or email:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.



88
